
Chapter 14 Report Writing for High-Tech Investigations Objectives - Explain the importance of reports - Describe guidelines for writing reports - Explain how to use forensics tools to generate reports Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Understanding the Importance of Reports - Communicate the results of your investigation - Including expert opinion - Courts require expert witness to submit written reports - Written report must specify fees paid for the expert’s services - And list all other civil or criminal cases in which the expert has testified - Deposition banks - Examples of expert witness’ previous testimonies Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Limiting a Report to Specifics - All reports to clients should start with the job mission or goal - Find information on a specific subject - Recover certain significant documents - Recover certain types of files - Before you begin writing, identify your audience and the purpose of the report Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Types of Reports - Computer forensics examiners are required to create different types of reports - Examination plan - What questions to expect when testifying - Attorney uses the examination plan to guide you in your testimony - You can propose changes to clarify or define information - Helps your attorney learn the terms and functions used in computer forensics Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Types of Reports (continued) - Verbal report Less structured Attorneys cannot be forced to release verbal reports Preliminary report Addresses areas of investigation yet to be completed Tests that have not been concluded Interrogatories Document production Depositions Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Types of Reports (continued) - Written report - Affidavit or declaration - Limit what you write and pay attention to details - Include thorough documentation and support of what you write Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Guidelines for Writing Reports - Hypothetical questions based on factual evidence - Less favored today - Guide and support your opinion - Can be abused and overly complex - Opinions based on knowledge and experience - Exclude from hypothetical questions - Facts that can change, cannot be used, or are not relevant to your opinion Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Guidelines for Writing Reports (continued) - As an expert witness, you may testify to an opinion, or conclusion, if four basic conditions are met: - Opinion, inferences, or conclusions depend on special knowledge or skills - Expert should qualify as a true expert - Expert must testify to a certain degree of certainty - Experts must describe facts on which their opinions are based, or they must testify to a hypothetical question Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations What to Include in Written Preliminary Reports - Anything you write down as part of your examination for a report - Subject to discovery from the opposing attorney - Considered high-risk documents - Spoliation - Destroying the report could be considered destroying or concealing evidence - Include the same information as in verbal reports Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations What to Include in Written Preliminary Reports (continued) - Additional items to include in your report: - Summarize your billing to date and estimate costs to complete the effort - Identify the tentative conclusion (rather than the preliminary conclusion) - Identify areas for further investigation and obtain confirmation from the attorney on the scope of your examination Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Report Structure - Structure Abstract Table of contents Body of report Conclusion References Glossary Acknowledgements

Appendixes Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Writing Reports Clearly - Consider Communicative quality Ideas and organization Grammar and vocabulary Punctuation and spelling - Lay out ideas in logical order - Build arguments piece by piece - Group related ideas and sentences into paragraphs - Group paragraphs into sections Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Writing Reports Clearly (continued) - Avoid jargon, slang, and colloquial terms - Define technical terms - Consider your audience - Consider writing style Use a natural language style Avoid repetition and vague language Be precise and specific Use active rather than passive voice Avoid presenting too many details and personal observations Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Writing Reports Clearly (continued) - Include signposts - Draw reader’s attention to a point Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Designing the Layout and Presentation of Reports - Decimal numbering structure - Divides material into sections - Readers can scan heading - Readers see how parts relate to each other - Legal-sequential numbering - Used in pleadings - Roman numerals represent major aspects - Arabic numbers are supporting information Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Designing the Layout and Presentation of Reports (continued) - Providing supporting material - Use material such as figures, tables, data, and equations to help tell the story as it unfolds - Formatting consistently - How you format text is less important than being consistent in applying formatting - Explaining examination and data collection methods - Explain how you studied the problem, which should follow logically from the purpose of the report Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Designing the Layout and Presentation of Reports (continued) - Including calculations - If you use any hashing algorithms, be sure to give the common name - Providing for uncertainty and error analysis - Protect your credibility - Explaining results and conclusions - Explain your findings, using subheadings to divide the discussion into logical parts - Save broader generalizations and summaries for the report’s conclusion Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Designing the Layout and Presentation of Reports (continued) - Providing references - Cite references by author’s last name and year of publication - Follow a standard format - Including appendixes - You can include appendixes containing material such as raw data, figures not used in the body of the report, and anticipated exhibits - Arrange them in the order referred to in the report Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Generating Report Findings with Forensics Software Tools - Forensics tools generate reports when performing analysis - Report formats - Plaintext - Word processor - HTML format Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using ProDiscover Basic to Generate Reports - Create a new project - Add an image file to the project - Search for file extensions Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using ProDiscover Basic to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports - Create a new case - Add evidence to the case - Analyze evidence with FTK - Look for image files - Locate encrypted files - Search for specific keywords - Indexed search - Live search Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) - Create bookmarks - Generate a report from your bookmarks Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Using FTK Demo to Generate Reports (continued) Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Summary - All U.S. district courts and many state courts require expert witnesses to submit written reports - Attorneys use deposition banks to research expert witnesses’ previous testimony - Reports should answer the questions you were retained to answer - A well-defined report structure contributes to readers’ ability to understand the information you’re communicating Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Summary (continued) - Clarity of writing is critical to a report’s success - Convey a tone of objectivity and be detached in your observations Guide to Computer Forensics and Investigations Digital Forensics A BASIC GUIDE FOR THE MANAGEMENT AND PROCEDURES OF A DIGITAL FORENSICS LABORATORY www.coe.int/cybercrime Version 1.1 June 2017 Acknowledgement The first edition of this Guide was published in October 2016 under the joint project of the Council of Europe and the European Union on Global Action on Cybercrime (GLACY). Work on this document was coordinated by Nigel Jones (United Kingdom) and Victor Voelzow (Germany).

Valuable inputs were received from cybercrime experts from GLACY project countries and areas as well as a range of other international experts from Africa, Asia and Europe.

The authors were: Nigel Jones (United Kingdom) Victor Völzow (Germany) Andrea Bradley (United Kingdom) Branko Stamenkovic (Serbia) This Guide will be improved and updated over time.

CONTACT Cybercrime Division Directorate General of Human Rights and Rule of Law Council of Europe, F-67075 Strasbourg Cedex (France) Email cybercrime@coe.int DISCLAIMER The views expressed in this technical report do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Council of Europe or the European Union or of the Parties to the treaties referred to.

Further tools and resources ... 11 Management of a digital forensic laboratory ... 13

Education and training of all stakeholders ... 26 Digital forensics lab processes and procedures ... 27

Subscriber Identity Module Digital Forensics Guide Introduction This Guide has been produced as a follow on to the Council of Europe Electronic Evidence Guide1, which was developed as a basic guide for police officers, prosecutors and judges. The Electronic Evidence Guide provides guidance on the steps to be taken to secure electronic evidence, for example at a crime scene and to ensure its evidential integrity is maintained until it is passed to digital forensics laboratory for further action. The present Guide takes the reader to the next stages of activity in the digital forensics arena. In addition to the practical processes and procedures to be followed in a laboratory environment, it deals with the management issues involved in the running of a laboratory and also the strategic considerations in establishing such a laboratory.

This Guide should also be at the disposal of prosecutors and judges. Although members of the judiciary are not obliged to be well acquainted or specialised in skills other than legal, contemporary criminal acts and their perpetrators are putting additional pressure on professionals both in prosecution services and courts to better understand and enhance their knowledge of cybercrime and raise their capabilities to render decisions in criminal cases on cybercrime or electronic evidence.

What is included The purpose of the Guide is to provide support and guidance to managers and practitioners of digital forensics laboratories in the setting up and running of such laboratories in such a way that any evidence produced by them is dealt with in such a manner that will ensure its authenticity for later admissibility in court. Although the Guide is not intended to be an instruction manual with step-by-step directions, it does provide an overview of the kinds of issues that often arise when developing and running a digital forensics laboratory and offers advice on how to deal with them.

Readers of this document should check if such advice already exists at the national level.

What is not included The guide does not make any recommendations regarding hardware and software choices that may be available. Each country and organisation will decide what is appropriate given their needs and available funds. It should be remembered that digital forensics equipment and commercial software can be a very expensive long term commitment and is not easy to change once the initial decision is made. Details of the types of costs associated with forensic software purchases and information about some options to use open source software are dealt with elsewhere in this document.

Available at the Cybercrime Octopus Community https://www.coe.int/en/web/octopus/home Digital Forensics Guide This Guide and the information contained in it are considered valid until 31 December 2018. Where conditions permit the Guide will be updated before that date to reflect any relevant changes in technology, procedures and practices. Any person or organisation wishing to use the Guide after the above date should contact the Council of Europe to obtain the most recent version.

Who is the Guide for? This Guide is designed for two specific categories of reader:

Those responsible for the development and management of their digital forensics laboratory that will form part of an overall digital forensics strategy,

Staff employed within a digital forensics laboratory, in technical roles relating to the digital forensics processes and procedures.

The guidance for the first group is designed to assist those responsible for developing digital forensic strategies, making decisions about building the capacity to deal with digital forensics and for those responsible for the management of laboratories. It is recognised that there is no single solution applicable to all countries or even different organisations within countries. The guide is designed to assist managers to make decisions about a subject with which many may not be familiar.

The second group consists of those with direct responsibility of laboratory activities and the staff that will carry out the function of acquisition, processing analysing and presenting electronic evidence.

The guidance for this group will be more specific to the functions related to the electronic evidence process and will allow procedures to be adopted that will meet requirements of national and international criminal justice systems.

As aforementioned, prosecutors, judges, prosecutorial and court assistants and other staff included in criminal proceedings on substantive level, should be introduced to the contents of this guide in parts which are of vital interest for the cases in their competence.

How should the Guide be used? This Guide should be seen as a template document that can be used by countries to consider when developing their digital forensics capability.

The advice given is intended to be used at both strategic and tactical levels, according to their national legislation, practice and procedure.

The overarching principles described in the Electronic Evidence Guide are just as relevant to the procedures conducted in the laboratory environment and are in accordance with generally accepted good practice for dealing with electronic evidence. The principles are set out below to reinforce their importance: Principle 1 - Data integrity No action taken should materially change any data, electronic device or media which may Digital Forensics Guide subsequently be used as evidence in court.

Principle 2 - Audit trail A record of all actions taken when handling electronic evidence should be created and preserved so that they can be subsequently audited. An independent third party should not only be able to repeat those actions, but also to achieve the same result.

Principle 3 - Specialist support If it is expected that electronic evidence may be found in the course of a planned operation, the person in charge of the operation should notify specialists/external advisers in time and to arrange their presence if possible.

Principle 4 - Appropriate training First responders must have the necessary and appropriate training to be able to search for and seize electronic evidence if no specialists are available at the scene.

Principle 5 - Legality The person and agency in charge of the case are responsible for ensuring that the law, the evidential safeguards and the general forensic and procedural principles are followed to the letter.

Further explanation of the principles is to be found in the Electronic Evidence Guide.

Readers should ensure that they are fully conversant with the laws of their own countries related to the digital forensics process and the admissibility of evidence adduced therefrom. National law should always be the primary point of reference. Advice given in the Guide is not expected or intended to contradict any national legislation and is at all times subject to national laws, rules and procedures.

Symbols and explanations Various symbols are used throughout the Guide to indicate the importance or difficulty of the content of the section they accompany.

This symbol indicates the This symbol indicates This symbol indicates section important highly information. information. information This symbol indicates the This symbol indicates This symbol specialised section advanced knowledge knowledge contains contains basic technical knowledge The following information boxes indicate that there are specific considerations highlighted by the Prosecutor. This advice as with the remainder of the document is subject to local legislation, which will always take priority.

Digital Forensics Guide Prosecutor's considerations Prosecutors’ considerations are very important for criminal justice officials who are involved in the development and management of a digital forensics laboratory and for the technical staff employed of a digital forensics laboratory, since the outcome of the digital forensics process should be valid evidence representing a cornerstone for prosecutorial decisions in a criminal case.

Depending on the country’s criminal law framework, the involvement of prosecutors will be needed at different stages of the criminal justice process. In some jurisdictions, the prosecution will only request a digital forensics expert opinion. In others, the prosecution will be more involved in the expertise processes, including involvement in particular phases of the process itself. In some jurisdictions, prosecutors have an advisory role or legal responsibility for the investigation process.

Irrespective of the legal framework, it is very likely that prosecutors will be first judiciary officials who are going to be presented with evidence resulting from the digital forensic process.

Therefore, this guide, together with the Council of Europe Electronic Evidence Guide, should be accessible to prosecutors and other parties involved in the criminal justice process.

What is digital forensics Digital Forensics is the branch of forensic science that focuses on identifying, acquiring, processing, analysing and reporting on data stored on a computer system, digital device or other storage media.

Each and every branch of Digital Forensics requires extensive training and experience making it impossible for one forensic examiner to be expert in all areas. The following chart shows the main subcategories and subject areas of Digital Forensics.

Digital Forensics Guide Digital Forensics Computer Forensics Mobile Forensics Post Mortem Forensics Network Forensics Android Forensics iOS Forensics Live Forensics Windows Phone/ Symbian/others Application Forensics Others, eg.

Live Network Forensics Captured Packets Forensics Malware Analysis Other Devices Forensics: DVR, routers, game consoles, skimming devices, etc In large countries, it is possible to have individual staff knowledgeable and skilled in each of the above disciplines. However in countries with a lower level of resources, it will be necessary to examine how the available resources may be put to best effect. This may involve outsourcing some activities or multi-skilling staff.

Appendices A number of useful tools to assist the digital forensics practitioner are appended to this document:

Further tools and resources There is a wide range of resources and tools available to complement this Guide. For example: The Council of Europe Electronic Evidence Guide that has been referred to at various times in this publication. This may be used for example to provide information to those responsible for the search and seizure of electronic evidence that is to be brought to the Digital Forensics Laboratory.

The Budapest Convention on Cybercrime2 Parties to the Convention is expected to enact law enforcement powers for securing electronic evidence and for enabling efficient international cooperation. Under Article 14 these powers can be applied to electronic evidence in any offence. These powers include: Expedited preservation of data at domestic (Article 16) and international (Article 29) levels, including the partial disclosure of traffic data (Articles 17 and 30); Search and seizure of stored computer data (Article 19); Real-time collection of traffic data and interception of content data at domestic (Articles 20 and 21) and international (Articles 33 and 34) levels; Rapid mutual assistance to access data in foreign jurisdictions (Article 31); Trans border access to data without the need for mutual assistance (Article 32).

The proposal for law enforcement training strategies prepared under CyberCrime@IPA.

The first responder training course pack prepared by the Council of Europe under CyberCrime@IPA project.

The introductory cybercrime and electronic evidence training course for the judiciary, developed under the Cybercrime@IPA project.

The advanced cybercrime and electronic evidence training course for the judiciary, developed under the Cybercrime@IPA project.

The judicial training concept prepared by the Council of Europe and the judicial training materials developed under CyberCrime@IPA project.

Guidelines for the delivery of Council of Europe judicial training courses on cybercrime and electronic evidence.

The typology study on criminal money flows on the internet prepared by MONEYVAL and the Global Project on Cybercrime of the Council of Europe.

The Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime (ETS No.185) Digital Forensics Guide The guidelines for law enforcement/Internet service provider cooperation adopted at the Octopus Conference of the Council of Europe in 2008.

The good practice study on specialised cybercrime units prepared under CyberCrime@IPA project.

Applicable rule of law safeguards and guarantees (Article 15 Budapest Convention) as documented under CyberCrime@IPA and Cybercrime@EAP projects.

The Octopus Cybercrime Community, a forum linking up the many hundred public and private sector cybercrime experts from all over the world.

This list is not exhaustive. Countries and organisations should avail themselves of all relevant national and international resources to assist them in the development of their digital forensics strategies and capabilities, ensuring that the overarching principles associated with the subject are adhered to.

Digital Forensics Guide Management of a digital forensic laboratory In this day and age it is not uncommon to find that all types of criminal acts are being carried with the use of the Internet, mobile devices and computers. In some parts of the world this type of criminal activity accounts for the majority of criminal investigations.

It is safe to say that as technology advances and becomes more affordable - so too will the use of digital data to research, facilitate and carry out various types of crime.

Digital forensic laboratories are being set up regularly by law enforcement agencies around the world. Some are professionally scoped and heavily invested in and others may be one officer with a computer and freely available forensic tools. Anyone who contemplates setting up and relying on a digital forensic laboratory should carefully research the requirements of their jurisdiction, ensuring they consult with the other players in the criminal justice system of the country.

Research Initial research should be conducted to establish recent statistics on the seizure of digital devices, the types of crimes, the location, specialism of the seizing officers and what, if any digital forensic analysis has been carried out. This information should give a fair guide of how quickly this type of investigation is growing and where to start when considering the initial size of a digital forensic laboratory and identifying the need for investment. The research should establish if there are any legal or procedural requirements that cover the creation and management of forensics services within the criminal justice system. Comparison with countries of similar geography and demographics, that have already established a digital forensics capability, will be a beneficial exercise.

Finding the answer to the following questions will assist decision makers to understand and recognise the scope of the requirements of the digital forensic laboratory that is to be created: How many reported crimes have been facilitated with the use of digital data in the last 3 years, 2 years and 1 year? Is there an obvious and documented growth of this type of investigation? If digital forensic investigation has been required, Who conducted the analysis? Where procedures were followed? What was the outcome? What was the cost of the examinations? Were some functions not able to be conducted with available resources? Are there other law enforcement agencies who have a similar requirement and could collaboration expedite the acceptance of any business case submitted? Digital Forensics Guide Once this initial research has been conducted, decision makers should have a better idea about the role and the size of the digital forensic laboratory as well as the number of staff required to provide an effective resource to all stakeholders.

Budgeting/capacity There are many factors to consider when completing a Business Case, not least of which is the overall cost. This can be broken down into two main areas: The initial ‘one off’ outlay (capital costs) - Premises, refurbishment, security, office/lab equipment, hardware and software.

The following chapters will assist with the specific considerations for each of these areas and will provide more detailed information to assist with the setting up of a digital forensic laboratory that is fit for purpose, scalable and resilient.

Premises Demand and budgets will play a significant part in the availability, size and location of suitable premises. When identifying suitable premises the following factors should be considered:

Security The premises will need to provide adequate security to store and investigate sensitive evidential data. It is not only the evidential data that needs to be secured, but managers must also consider the security of personal information, valuable software and hardware, actual exhibits and personal information pertaining to employed staff.

Preventing unauthorised entry and monitoring visitors to the premises should protect the access to the laboratory. Due to the sensitive data held within a digital forensic laboratory - it is advisable to have some form of record of entry and exit to assist with maintaining the continuity of the evidence within. The simplest way to do this is to have a witnessed signing in/out book but this requires a second person to be always present. Other types of access control include physical locks and keys, electronic keypads, swipe cards, CCTV and biometrics.

The premises should, ideally be alarmed with motion sensors in each room and at each entry point (external doors and windows). The windows and doors should be re-enforced to prevent nonauthorised entry and theft and be covered to prevent observation of from external sources.

Fire detection and ‘dry’ fire quenching is also important and should be in place to protect people, property and evidence.

Off-site back up of electronic evidence held on servers should be considered mandatory and included in any security policy.

Location Several factors will come into place when considering the location of any digital forensic laboratory.

The availability of suitable premises will be a major factor in identifying the appropriate location.

Ideally, a property in a central location would be a preferred choice. After identifying the business area that the laboratory will be service and the location from which the exhibits will be seized a more informed choice of location will be identified in the business case.

Ideally the Laboratory should be within another building as this provides additional security and resilience. It is better not to have windows or as few as possible, because these are a vulnerability to the security of the office and increase the possibility that the sensitive data could be observed from outside. If the identified location does have windows, they should be secured with bars or shutters and any glass should be frosted or opaque.

The delivery to and examination of evidence in the digital forensic laboratory should not be hindered by its physical location. Considerations about the physical location should include; If it is above the ground floor, is there a lift available to transport large quantities of computer evidence? If a large quantity of electronic evidence is to be delivered - how safe is the property in the vehicle.

How far away is the car park to the laboratory? Is the building or office robust enough to ensure the security of the data and protect the people within? Are the walls, floor and ceiling strong enough to withstand physical or environmental damage? What is the risk from flood, fire, natural disasters and civil unrest? Incursion by terrorist or criminal organisations seeking to damage investigations.

When considering the size of any laboratory, considerations that account for the various tasks that will be conducted within must be made. It is best practice to try and segregate the specific types of activities to prevent cross contamination and loss of exhibits.

A reception type area where evidence can be delivered or collected without allowing access to the actual laboratory should be incorporated in the planning of the digital forensic laboratory. A high priority is the need for a secure area to store exhibits and sensitive data. This should be a room located within the digital forensic laboratory. Alternatively a fixed metal cage could be used, depending on the amount of exhibits likely to be stored. Any access to and removal or return of exhibits to the storage room must be recorded. As with access to the laboratory, there are several different physical and virtual methods to achieve this.

Digital Forensics Guide There will need to be a laboratory, which is restricted to the forensic analysts of computers and mobile devices - or both. Each analyst will require a large desk for IT equipment, filing cabinets to hold their case files and comfortable chairs.

The digital forensic laboratory will need a server - this may be stored securely within the laboratory and if available, a separate room.

An area designated to imaging and processing will be required - this should be separate to the analyst’s workstations and should, ideally, be close to the property store to reduce the amount of manual handling.

A breakout or rest area is important to provide the analysts with an area away from their investigations.

Considerations for an additional room for briefings or meetings as well as an additional office for the laboratory manager to utilise are advised.

Some laboratories have a separate ‘viewing’ room to allow for visiting officers/prosecutors to view their cases without causing distraction to the forensic analysts.

Ideally the office will have its own rest room facilities or there will be one situated in close proximity.

In addition to the above, areas dedicated to storage of non-evidential equipment like media copiers, media production equipment, printers, scanners, files, property bags, tags, evidence labels, storage media, office equipment and personal belongings of staff should be considered in selecting the most appropriate place to locate a digital forensic laboratory.

The building or office selected should be large enough to expand if there is an anticipated increase in demand for digital forensic investigation.

Once you have established the required laboratory size, consider the longevity of such a facility.

Many existing digital forensics facilities have found it necessary to relocate or expand in a short space of time due to exponential increases in workload. The information gathered during the research phase will give a good idea of the likely need for future expansion. It is extremely expensive to relocate or expand, so it may be beneficial to provide room for expansion in the initial business plan.

Air conditioning Air conditioning is of vital importance, as a room with many working computers will generate a great deal of heat. If a server is positioned in its own area - this area should be cooled.

Overheating can lead to loss of data and damage to hardware. Ideally an extractor unit should be purchased and installed in an area to provide greatest comfort to staff and to control the temperature and humidity of the laboratory. The exhibit storage facility should have its own air conditioning or climate control system to try to prevent deterioration of stored evidence.

Staff It is likely that the person scoping and preparing the business case will be the laboratory manager or will be involved in the recruitment of such a Manager. Best practice shows that the laboratory manager should be involved in the recruiting of the staff that will be employed to carry out the different roles within the laboratory.

Depending on the size of the laboratory and the required number of staff they must consider the different functions that are required. Staff roles and responsibilities will need to be documented and detailed job descriptions should be prepared so that each member of the team has a clear understanding of their job profile. Where possible the structure of a digital forensics capability should incrementally allow for staff to be able to advance within the organisation, rather than leaving. It is accepted that this is only possible within a facility with plentiful resources, however it should always be an aim. There is strong anecdotal evidence that shows in many digital forensics laboratories highly qualified staff spend much of their time undertaking mundane tasks below their level of capability. To avoid this, it is important to recognise the activities to be undertaken should be clearly defined in the job profiles. The roles and responsibilities that should be considered include the following: Laboratory manager The manager must have some advanced technical knowledge and a strong understanding of the legislative requirements for electronic evidence as well as the procedures and processes to be followed. It is vital that the manager understands the overarching principles described in the Electronic Evidence Guide and reiterated earlier on in these operating processes. The laboratory manager should have control over the original set up, identifying the building, purchasing equipment and software and setting the procedures and functions of the laboratory. They should be responsible for leading the recruiting, training, mentoring, counselling and guidance of everybody employed within the unit.

Digital forensics analyst - computers The analysts will require technical knowledge, and where possible appropriate qualifications. Ideally they should have some training in the use of digital forensic software. Alternately these staff members will require specific forensic training to bring them up to a suitable skill level. Digital forensic analysts must have knowledge of legislation and be aware of the points to prove when investigating different types of crimes. These roles require an analytical and investigative mind-set; the digital forensic analyst must be able to deliver their findings in a clear and understandable format. It is important that digital forensic analysts have good oral and written communication skills.

Digital forensics analyst - mobile devices The analysts will require technical knowledge, and where possible appropriate qualifications. Ideally they should have some training in the use of mobile device acquisition. Alternately these staff members will require specific training to bring them up to a suitable skill level. Digital forensic Digital Forensics Guide analysts must have knowledge of legislation and be aware of the points to prove when investigating different types of crimes. These roles require an analytical and investigative mind-set; the digital forensic analyst must be able to deliver their findings in a clear and understandable format. It is important that digital forensic analysts have good oral and written communication skills.

Forensic imaging technician The role of the Imaging Technical is to take forensically sound copies (images) of computer hard drives and other storage media. Depending on the size of the laboratory, several technicians may be required. The Forensic Imaging Technician will need to have good technical knowledge and an understanding of the various methods of forensically acquiring digital data. A key skill requirement is attention to detail and the ability to clearly document all their actions, the verification of imaged data and the continuity of evidence.

Administration An important role within any laboratory is continuity of the evidence and requisite recording of the chain of custody. Depending on the size of the laboratory and the amount of electronic evidence to be examined, an administrator role may need to be filled. The administrator would take responsibility for documenting each new case, checking the exhibit numbers/serial numbers and case files are all accounted for. Other considerations include Making decisions about the seriousness of the investigation.

Liaison with outside agencies, police officers and the rest of the laboratory team.

Recruiting Recruitment should start as soon as the business case has been accepted and the premises are identified. Having key staff on hand to assist with the identification and selection of hardware and software would be beneficial. It may be that these key staff are already trained or are familiar with a certain type of forensic software and would rather work with this. Ideally the roles and responsibilities of each vacancy will be established prior to advertising.

Police officers or police support staff? Some forensic laboratories will be staffed totally by serving police officers, some with only support staff and others with a combination of both. There are pros and cons for each option.

Police officers tend to have better investigative knowledge and are more familiar with legislation and points to prove criminal action. They will be less likely to move onto other job opportunities and will be more used to working unsociable hours.

Digital Forensics Guide Support staff may have more relevant technical qualifications and received more training. They may have practical experience in the investigation of digital data but may be more inclined to seek career progression and move to the private sector.

A mixture of both may improve your overall technical ability and provide a more diverse team.

Vetting Whoever is recruited to work in the digital forensic laboratory will require some form of background check or security vetting. All staff within the laboratory will have access to sensitive data and evidence of serious criminal activity. It is important to establish that they or their close family have not been involved in any criminal activity previously, especially dishonesty offences. It is also prudent to identify if they have any financial difficulties that may make them susceptible to bribery or corruption. It is also worth considering any previous affiliation with extreme political groups. It may be that managers will have access to existing vetting material within their environment or alternately cover the Vetting criteria during the selection and interview processes.

Staff development and human resources Once staff are recruited, it is important to continually develop their abilities, motivate and retain them. The establishment of an achievable staff development program can support this. This must commence with an induction to their new workplace. Initial documents should clearly illustrate their role and responsibilities, their reporting manager and their senior manager. These initial documents must identify any immediate training needs or desires and record arrangements that are agreed to address this plan. Such arrangements may send staff on training courses or arranging for them to shadow and learn from colleagues alongside a planned timeframe. For example, all Digital Forensic Analysts will require externally certificated training to provide them with the confidence to use the forensics tools and the credibility to deliver reliable evidence in a court. Consideration may be given to issuing each staff member with a Personal Development Portfolio (PDP), which will contain an ongoing record of their training and qualifications, as well as milestones achieved in their work place mentored activities.

Managers may use PDP’s to set targets for individuals that will collectively within the team create a more balanced and effective capacity.

Advancements in technology are moving at a very fast pace and digital forensics analysts need to be regularly trained and retrained to keep up to date with the advances in digital forensics science.

Management will also need to set aside some time for these analysts to undertake research and development. As new tools and applications come onto the market - the analysts should evaluate them to identify artifacts of value to the digital forensic laboratory.

Staff retention will be key to managing a successful digital forensic laboratory. A great deal of time and money will be spent on training of staff, and it is vital they are retained, especially once they are trained and begin to become more experienced. Having robust personal development plans for each member of staff will give them objectives and a better understanding of their career path and future opportunities. It must always be remembered that retaining staff is not simply a matter of salary.

Developing a working environment, where staff can flourish is equally if not more important.

Digital Forensics Guide There are some guides available, which relate to the desired competencies in the digital forensics arena: EU Training Competency Framework on Cybercrime by CEPOL, ECTEG, EuroJust and Europol EC3 - available via Europol EC3; A skills matrix being developed (and available in early 2017) as an output of the EU funded SENTER project.

If appropriate, the probationary period should be set once the level of training and development of the individual is identified.

The role of mentor is as guide and support, possibly a friend and confidante, as well as source of information. It is envisaged that the need for a mentor will diminish as time goes by and will disappear completely as the new member of staff settles in to their new role.

Mentoring takes place alongside appraisal and the assessment of performance in relation to reappointment or confirmation of satisfactory completion of probation.

Welfare Digital forensics Laboratories are often fast paced and stressful. When dealing with serious criminal investigations it is common that time pressures are encountered as investigators are pushing for evidential results in order to further detain, charge or release their suspect or to prevent further suffering to victims. Analysts work need to be monitored, as mistakes can be made under pressure.

Break out areas should be provided so that analysts can walk away from the data and take a moment to refresh. Managers need to observe their analysts to assess individuals’ workload and offer support and intervention if casework becomes stressful.

Health and safety The laboratory manager should take responsibility to ensure the health and safety of all staff and the visitors to the laboratory. He should conduct risk assessments by examining current conditions and situations and addressing anything thought to be hazardous or potentially damaging to health or safety. The manager must also be aware of any legal health and safety requirements. Health and safety measures apply equally in respect of people that may visit the laboratory and measures must be put in place to ensure that they do not see or are subjected to illegal or distressing materials. The possibility of this can be mitigated by following the ideas previously provided with regard to the structure and set up of the laboratory.

These are some of the standard H&S features that are encountered in a digital forensics laboratory: Anti-static mats and wrist straps - reducing the risk of static damage to equipment and exhibits.

Contaminated Substances - preventing exposure with the use of surgical gloves or other protective clothing.

Handling/lifting - ensuring staff are aware of the correct way to lift heavy items to avoid injury.

Rubber matting - to reduce the risk of electric shock Circuit breakers - to reduce the risk of electric shock or damage to data.

Physical laboratory requirements Once the location of suitable premises has been identified and the initial recruitment processes for a digital forensics team are underway, it is important to consider the establishment of the physical laboratory.

Office equipment The size of any laboratory will dictate the amount of office equipment required.

Administrator desk - Ideally you will have a reception area that will require a reception desk large enough to hold two monitors and two computers, a telephone and a significant amount of paperwork. In addition, it would be beneficial to have an adjoining clear surface to deposit incoming and outgoing exhibits and case papers to allow for the checking, documenting and recording of these exhibits by the administrator. A chair for the administrator and chairs for visitors could be considered. It is envisaged that this area would be less secure than the rest of the laboratory so no case papers or sensitive paperwork should be stored in this area.

Secure property store - This facility should be large enough to store various items of computer and mobile phone evidence for a significant period of time. Computers can come in all shapes and sizes and some servers are very large and heavy. Conversely, mobile phones and external storage devices could be easily damaged or lost if not stored securely. The property store should be a secure room with access control. It should be situated close to reception and close to the Imaging area to avoid the need to carry heavy items too far. Ideally you should install strong shelving and a numbering system to segregate the exhibits to allow easy identification of exhibits for each case.

Consider purchasing plastic boxed to house the smaller exhibits. The exact location of the exhibits for each case should be noted in the case management system and exhibits returned to the same location once imaging has been concluded. It may also be worth considering isolating the secure store from radio waves by implementing Faraday shielding. This will ensure the isolation of devices with wireless communication capabilities. There have been reported instances of the contents of mobile devices being remotely deleted while in police custody. A Faraday cage is very expensive and the use of Faraday bags may be an alternative. As a last resort, completely enclosing the devices in strong silver foil as a temporary measure will prevent communication with devices.

Forensic imaging department - The imaging department will require a large, clean surface area preferably with raised edges to prevent the loss of screws and small components, whilst computers are being dismantled for acquisition. Anti-static mats should be on all work surfaces. An area for digital camera and battery chargers should be arranged, as all evidence should be photographed prior to imaging. Each imager will require a desk area large enough to hold two monitors and two computers, acquisition hardware, telephone and paperwork. A chair for each imager, preferably a comfortable operator’s chair, with lumbar support and height adjustment should also be provided.

Analyst work station - The digital forensics analyst will require a large desk area big enough to hold several monitors, two computers, various paperwork, mobile devices and mobile device extraction hardware and tools. Again a comfortable chair would be beneficial due to the amount of time spent sat at the monitor. It would also be advisable to position the desks to avoid others from Digital Forensics Guide accidentally viewing sensitive data on the screens - or put privacy screens between the workstations to provide a cubicle type environment.

Server room - The space allocated to central server will need to be secure due to the amount of sensitive data that may be stored within. It will need adequate air conditioning to prevent overheating and will need room for resilience like UPS.

Software and hardware Hardware - The digital forensic laboratory should be a high tech environment with lots of sensitive data being analysed and stored. As such, it will require an examination network, which is isolated from any external connections. As all laboratory staff will use this network it will need to be resilient, secure and fast. When setting up any server or system, best practice would be to opt for the highest available processing power and a suitable data storage array.

This system must provide Internet access to the team, either individually supplied to all hosts or just to one dedicated computer within the laboratory. This should allow analysts and staff easy use for checking emails, researching, downloading patches, updates and tools.

Any analyst would prefer that two monitors make their work easier. When it comes to building their final reports it is much easier to have the report open on one screen and their investigation on the other. It can also assist when viewing a high quantity of thumbnails. Whilst this is extra expense, the benefits of having this viewing capability will provide time saving benefits along with a robust system that can support the analysts provide more accurate reports for evidence.

Those responsible for imaging computers will require sanitised storage disks and write blockers to prevent any changes in data and the integrity of the original evidence. There are numerous types of write blockers on the market and several software tools that can also be used.

In addition to backing up operating data, the laboratory will be dealing with three additional types of storage issues; the original evidence, the forensically created images and the data generated after the investigation. Consideration must be given as to how this is all to be stored, archived and backed up. A stringent back up and archive regime should be implemented to offer resilience.

If any of the digital forensic team are likely to assist with the execution of search warrants and engage in ‘on site’ acquisitions and analysis - they will require an ‘on site’ kit (see appendix B for an exemplary configuration of a device carrying case). In addition to a portable workstation or laptop and the imaging tools, consideration must be given for purchasing the following equipment: Property bags, security tags and exhibit labels Torch Screw drivers Sterile gloves and clothing

Digital Forensics Guide Communication devices Power extensions, leads and adaptors Camera, video recorder Storage boxes or suitable container for the carriage of equipment.

Software - It is important to consider that there is not only the initial purchase but also the ongoing cost of licensing, support and training, associated with most types of digital forensic software. The initial and ongoing cost of licenses can be significant and research should be undertaken before purchase to ensure the hardware and software being obtained correctly matches the laboratories requirements and the staff’s preference. Appendix A shows an exemplary matrix that shows how a lab manager can create a comparison between different forensic software products taking into account the functionality as well as the cost of purchase, license renewal and training.

It is worthy of note that some digital forensics analysts can conduct entire investigations with the use of open source or free software - however there is a lack of support and training opportunities with these types of product. Many jurisdictions and standards will require ‘dual tool verification’ and additional software may need to be purchased in order for the analysts to compare and verify their findings.

A fundamental requirement for the smooth running of any laboratory is some type of case management system. This is a database that holds all the relevant administration information about the evidence and cases held at the laboratory and will be fundamental to the integrity of the analysts’ processes.

The minimum entries for a case management system should be as follows: Date, time and person delivering and receiving the exhibit to the laboratory.

All this information is vitally important to show continuity, credibility and verification of actions and evidence. A software database should be created by a technically proficient person unless the forensic laboratory utilises on of the commercial software packages that are available.

Quality assurance/ review procedure As with all types of evidence it is possible that digital findings will be questioned once they are presented to a court of law. Due to the volatile nature of electronic evidence it is imperative that steps are taken to ensure the integrity of the evidence and the validity of the findings.

It is very important that procedures to monitor the quality of the work undertaken by the laboratory are established and implemented from the outset. All staff and managers must be fully conversant with their role in quality assurance and should adhere to the procedures on all cases.

Random QA checks, peer reviews and administrative reviews should be carried out before a case is labeled as completed.

Managers should consider the introduction of recognised, externally audited, standards to maintain quality, information security and validation of forensic techniques. These standards are described in ISO 9001 - Quality Management, ISO 27001 - Information Security and ISO 17025 - Laboratory Validation.

Streamlined examination and reporting It is sensible to introduce responsible methods of prioritising workload from the beginning.

Another consideration that will support the streamlining of examination is to put in place a form of triage. This triage will allow interim examinations to be conducted in order to establish the likelihood of a positive result. Several jurisdictions now use a form of streamlined reporting, so that Digital Forensics Guide a reduced amount of evidence is produced initially, in the anticipation that the defendant will accept his guilt at court. Where this does not happen and the matter is to be subject of a full court trial, a more comprehensive examination should be carried out in good time for any trial.

Retention of data In a busy digital forensics laboratory it is important to have a data retention policy in place. If this is not implemented and followed from the beginning, a situation may quickly arise where there is insufficient storage available at the laboratory to hold the data. This may be in breach of good practice and the laboratory may be breaching local data protection legislation. Once implemented there should be regular checks to make sure the laboratory is still compliant. In some jurisdictions there are legal requirements for the retention of data, particularly in serious cases. Any such requirements should be at the forefront of any policy.

Education and training of all stakeholders At some time the preparation of the laboratory will be underway and the staff will commence their employment. At this time submissions will be made requiring the digital examination of data. It must be reinforced to staff and colleagues about what can be reasonably expected from examining a computer, tablet, phone, or any digital device.

To prevent errors at the time of seizure of electronic evidence, it will be necessary to circulate instructions and guidance to police officers, which gives them directions in order to fully consider the implications of their actions at the time of seizing digital devices. Prosecutors and judges should also be aware of the procedures that the police follow, in order to assure themselves that the correct procedures have been adopted in individual cases they may be prosecuting or adjudicating.

Digital Forensics Guide Digital forensics lab processes and procedures This chapter covers the processes and procedures that typically are involved in a digital forensics examination. An overall, chronological process model is used in order to provide a better overview over the main processes.

During all phases of a digital forensics examination it is vital to remember the special characteristics of electronic evidence as laid out in the Electronic Evidence Guide.

Please remember that this manual is not intended to be used as a step-by-step set of instructions.

While it describes processes and procedures and provides indications of what should be considered in all phases of a digital forensics analysis, it does not explain which features of a certain software need to used or where exactly and in which format certain artefacts from all operating systems and applications need to be parsed.

In addition to the explanatory text a number of useful resources have been created in order to visually aid in the faster understanding and remembering of the processes and procedures.

Appendix J - Digital Forensics Report Template These resources can be used as template documents and may be adapted as required.

Overall process model In a case that involves digital forensics the standard procedure typically consists of four stages: Acquisition Processing Analysis Presentation The following subchapters will explain these stages in more detail. Each stage consists of several procedures which are thoroughly explained.

As every case is different not all of the above stages are necessary any time. Laboratory managers can for example decide that in extremely urgent cases or cases that involve an unusually high amount of data the acquisition step can be skipped and a triage approach is followed in the processing phase while the analysis stage will be extremely shortened. Decisions like that should depend on the aim of the investigation and the characteristics of the case.

Prosecutor's considerations Criminal procedure and substantive law vary through countries and continents. The usual division between “common law” and “civil law” criminal justice systems still exists, but the borderline is becoming less visible and hybrid systems emerge as time goes by and practitioners all over the world are demanding more unified and, above all, more expedited systems for criminal justice.

The position and role of prosecutors in a contemporary criminal justice system becomes more prominent. In most systems prosecutors are bridging points between suppression and litigation, between discovery and adjudication of criminal acts, and between the police and other law enforcement agencies as well as judges and courts.

Taking that into account, processes and procedures in the forensics laboratory may or may not be under scrutiny of the public or state prosecutor, but one thing should always Digital Forensics Guide be on the mind of laboratory staff: facts discovered and evidence produced is always going to end in the hands of a prosecutors who will be responsible to render lawful decisions about the fate of the case and it’s perpetrator.

The aim of the investigation should always be two-fold: acquisition of all existing evidence with regards to the case, and ability to reproduce and explain the forensic procedure which led to the acquisition.

Prosecutors should be interested in all stages of the process, but they will most probably focus on the acquisition and presentation stages.

On some occasions, the acquisition stage will be the first encounter of the prosecutor with the electronic evidence in a criminal case. Often, this contact will happen during the on call duty and maybe during late hours. With an increasing role of prosecutors within criminal law systems, they are in charge of decision making throughout the whole investigation process or a significant part thereof. Thus, a forensic examiner should expect important and expedited decisions about the acquisition of electronic evidence to be taken by the responsible prosecutor. In such cases it will be very important that information presented by examiners to prosecutors about the acquisition and actions needed includes all relevant facts in an understandable manner indicating clearly the connection with the crime under investigation.

Examiners should understand a prosecutor’s questions and directions, comment on them, provide further information and be prepared to extend the acquisition to other hardware and software if technically and legally possible.

Presentation of extracted evidence and established facts represents the final stage and goal of the whole process and will be covered in more detail later on in this Guide.

Acquisition stage Electronic evidence needs to be acquired in a forensically sound manner. Acquisition of data is typically conducted by collecting volatile data from a running computer system during a search, or by acquiring a storage medium from a seized computer or in any other stage during an investigation. The application of specifically defined and tested procedures at the acquisition step is crucial as there is an enormous scope for irreversible errors to be made. It is important to keep the chain of custody intact at any stage, to document all steps carefully and to verify all images and copies that were acquired.

The intangible nature of any data and information stored in electronic form makes it much easier to manipulate and more prone to alteration than traditional forms of evidence. This has created special challenges for the justice system, which requires that such data have to be handled in a special way to ensure the integrity of the evidence.

Similar to other types of forensic evidence, the correct acquisition and handling of electronic evidence are vital to the outcome of a case. Close attention must be paid to ensure that the general guidelines are followed at all times: Handling by specialists: Every kind of electronic device has its own specific characteristics that require the correct and appropriate procedures must be applied. One of the greatest risks is the unintentional modification of the evidence. Failure to adhere to approved procedures is likely to lead to formal challenges in court about data integrity that can undermine or invalidate the evidence.

Rapid evolution of electronic evidence sources: New technologies are invented and develop very quickly. Consequently the procedures and techniques to be applied to them also need to be constantly reviewed and updated.

Use of proper procedures, techniques and tools: As in more traditional forensic disciplines, digital forensic specialists require special tools and knowledge to undertake their investigations properly. It is imperative that the correct techniques and tools are used for the situations encountered. The procedures must also be auditable and repeatable by other specialists if the information obtained is to have evidential value.

Admissibility: Since the ultimate goal is to use evidence to prove or disprove disputed facts, electronic evidence must be obtained in compliance with existing legislation and best practice to ensure admissibility at trial.

Before even considering starting the acquisition process either the laboratory manager or the exhibit officer must check whether the proper permission for a data acquisition exists.

Digital Forensics Guide If proper permission exists, special attention should be given to the correct handing over of the exhibits. Particular attention should be given to the following aspects: Are all exhibits tagged? Are all exhibits labels filled out completely and correctly? Is the exhibit register complete and correct? Is the chain of custody thoroughly documented? Are there any damages to the exhibits? If so, have they been documented? Are all security seals intact? All exhibits, including the internal storage media should be photographed.

Acquisition of computer systems In order to preserve the integrity of the original evidence, forensic imaging technicians and digital forensics analysts should acquire the storage media of a computer system in a forensically sound manner as described in this chapter. The aim of the acquisition of a computer system is to produce an identical copy or image of the original data without changing the original evidence. This forensic copy will then become the basis of all further steps in the forensic examination.

The acquisition process typically includes the following steps: Identification Wiping Connection of storage media of target media of media to writeblocker / duplicator where possible Imaging Verification Archiving of original and

Digital Forensics Guide 3.2.1.2 Wiping imaging media As the aim of the acquisition process is to produce a forensically sound copy/image of the computer's storage media the digital forensics analyst needs to ensure that this copy will be stored on a target medium which does not contain any other data that do not belong to the case being examined.

To avoid cross-contamination of the target copy/image with other data (e.g. from the examiner's files or from past cases) the medium that should hold the new copy or image has to be sterilised.

Please note that using traditional write-blocking techniques it is not possible to avoid changes of data on a solid-state drive or flash-media which include a controller chip. As soon as the controller is attached to a power supply it will start to reorganise data on the flash chips. Techniques like wear-levelling, write-amplification and garbage collection are common tasks that are carried out by the controller even when attached to a write-blocking device. The only yet resource-intensive way to create a true forensic copy of flash-media is by disordering the chip(s) from the circuit board and then reassembles the data in the correct way where possible.

Software write-blockers typically involve any combination of the following techniques: avoid mounting a file system mount a file system read-only change the operating systems parameters for handling external storage devices install their own drivers and background services Digital Forensics Guide Software write-blockers are often used in forensic boot-DVDs where they are needed because there might be no way to physically get hold of the storage media of a computer system and attach it to a hard ware write-blocking device (e.g. flash media might be soldered onto the mainboard of Ultrabooks).

Depending on the techniques used some software write-blockers might not block write attempts to the disk under any circumstances (e.g. some techniques do not stop a corrupt file system from being repaired).

The imaging software can include features like: recognition of hidden area (see below) imaging multiple devices simultaneously imaging to multiple destinations at the same time imaging queues hash verification with common hash algorithms hash verification at different stages of the imaging process support the most common forensic image formats producing encrypted and compressed images resuming an interrupted acquisition process tolerance to hardware errors Finally, as part of the data integrity principle, an experienced examiner should always be alert to the possibility of anti-forensic techniques. Hidden areas like host-protected areas (HPA) or device configuration overlay (DCO), which are only addressable via special ATA commands can be recognised be some of the imaging software’s.

Digital Forensics Guide A digital forensic analyst should typically aim for a full physical copy of a whole disk because it includes deleted and formerly allocated areas. However, when dealing with encryption a logical copy of the unlocked data is preferred to a physical copy of the encrypted data. There can also be situations during a search and seizure operation where creating a physical copy might not be possible, out-of-scope or simply not covered by the warrant or other authority.

Both, the physical and the logical copy can be written in different ways. Either they are cloned, which means that the data is directly copied bit-by-bit from one storage medium to another, or they are written as an image file, which means that all data is copied bit-by-bit from one storage medium into one or more image files on a target medium. The latter technique is the more common one as writing the data into an image file offers some advantages as laid out in the following chapter.

Special attention should be given to the image format when the image is to be analysed in a different forensic laboratory which might use different forensic software. This is especially important when the investigation involves multiple jurisdictions.

It is good practise that hash verifications are done at two points at the imaging process. The first hash calculation should be done at the beginning of the imaging process in order to produce the hash value of the original medium. The second hash calculation should be done at the end of the imaging process. This second calculation should be done on both the original medium as well as the copy/image in order to prove that a) the data on the original medium has not changed during the imaging process and b) the data on the copy/image is exactly the same as on the original. In the forensic imaging formats the calculated hash sum is typically stored in the metadata area of the image. It can then be used in the later stages of the analysis to verify that the data in the image that is to be analysed is still the same as the data that has been acquired.

Even if the hash based verification returns a positive result, the digital forensics analyst should still pre-examine the data to ensure it looks authentic and does not exhibit any traits suggesting that the data may have been modified or tampered with before or during the imaging process. Devices can be self-encrypted or they can have a layer of protection that only allows communication when the device is attached to a certain trusted platform. Imaging such devices can produce a valid hash-verification even though the data that have been copied are not usable for a forensic analysis.

Please note that hash verification for solid-state drives and flash-media that has its own controller will most likely fail because the controller of the medium might have changed the data while connected to a power supply.

While the digital forensic analyst is conducting the analysis with his working copy of the image there should still be a backup stored on another system (e.g. an imaging server).

Acquisition of mobile devices As with computer-based examinations, the aim during the acquisition of mobile devices is to produce the best possible copy, or image, of data stored on the mobile device. With mobile devices however, it may not be possible to make a full, exact copy of the original data due to the device’s own limitations and limitations of available forensic solutions. It may be that in order to acquire the best image of a mobile device possible, changes may have to be made to the device to allow for the acquisition process.

Digital Forensics Guide The acquisition process typically includes the following steps: Prosecutor's considerations Mobile device acquisition and subsequent steps can present a legal challenge since mobile devices are, in the majority of the cases, mobile communication devices (e.g. smart phones). Depending on jurisdictions, different countries and their criminal law systems may impose additional rules when it comes to the above mentioned steps, especially the processing and analysis. Thus, there is a probability that additional legal instruments are needed to get permission to implement this procedure. Forensic experts should be aware of this and, when in doubt, consult with the authority leading the investigation, which is in most cases the prosecution service.

Isolation Acquisition Processing Analysis Presentation 3.2.2.1 Exhibit Handling Forensic officers must use extra care when handling mobile devices, as they contain batteries and can easily be powered on accidentally. This is likely to change evidential data in the process, such as time and date information for last use. Experts should pay special attention during initial handling to identify power buttons and to provide network isolation at all times.

The ‘Isolation’ phase is essential, as many devices require acquisitions to be conducted when it is ‘Live.’ This means that the examiner will be required to power the device on in order to use the device functioning throughout the acquisition. If the mobile device is not isolated and allowed to connect to external networks, such as the relevant mobile network or a wireless Internet connection, data may be changed on the device. One example is that it is possible to remotely wipe some mobile devices.

Isolation can be achieved through different forms: Production of a ‘Laboratory SIM/IDEN card’ - a SIM/IDEN card that appears to the device as the original SIM/IDEN card but lacks the capability to actually connect to the mobile network. A Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) / Integrated Digital Enhanced Network (IDEN) identifies the subscriber to the network which the mobile device wishes to connect to Acquisition in a network shielded room - a dedicated laboratory with Faraday shielding installed to prevent network isolation.

Use of wireless jamming equipment - equipment can be acquired that can jam and prevent wireless signals from reaching the exhibit. These devices are illegal in some Digital Forensics Guide jurisdictions.

The best method will depend on local laws, laboratory set up and on the device being examined.

Consideration should also be applied to prevent connection to Wi-Fi and Bluetooth signals.

Before proceeding with acquiring the mobile device exhibit, it must be identified. The device will often have an equipment label affixed to the inside of the handset, if it is a mobile telephone, or printed on the back of the device. The label will include an International Mobile Equipment Identify Number (IMEI), a Mobile Equipment Identity Number (MEID) or Serial Number. This data can be used to uniquely identify the devices and is important for requesting billing records or conducting cell site analysis later. The make, model and IMEI/MEID can then be used to look up the device using your forensic packages to determine what level of support is available (for information regarding the different levels of support, see chapter 3.2.2.6).

Also at this stage, a review of the case paperwork supplied with the exhibit from the officer in charge should be undertaken to ascertain what evidence is required from the device. This can help the examiner make a decision in regards to what level of examination should be undertaken, i.e. if deleted data is required then a physical examination should be sort for. An attempt should also be made to gather any known passcodes, passwords or patterns from the device’s owner prior to the full examination. This will ensure that no matter what level of support is available for the device, at least access can be granted to the data that is live and accessible to the user.

Once this information has been gathered, the forensic examiner should draw up a plan of action as to how they are going to examine the device and any associated additional media cards, i.e.

SIM/IDEN cards or memory cards. This plan should include the acquisition of data from the SIM / IDEN card(s) and memory card(s) (if applicable) and what level of exam is going to be undertaken and why. The examiner should also plan a second level of exam in case the first level of exam is not successful due to various difficulties, i.e. a broken or ineffective power button (see chapter 3.2.2.6 for levels of examination).

Digital Forensics Guide 3.2.2.4 Acquisition process It is important that, at all stages of an examination, the mobile device under scrutiny is isolated from all external connections. This prevents the device from altering any stored data. A number of modern devices have the capacity to be remotely (and securely) wiped. Isolating the devices will help to prevent this from happening.

Mobile devices are presented with three distinct media that require separate handling and investigation techniques: SIM / IDEN Cards - Requires specialist mobile phone forensic tools and equipment.

The necessary forensic tools must be provided to the laboratory along with adequate hardware to support acquisition of these devices and examination of the data.

At this stage, the logical acquisition of the SIM/IDEN card and physical acquisition of the memory card should be undertaken. A physical examination is not possible for a SIM/IDEN card. This should always be carried out prior to the examination of the device itself. The memory card should only be returned to the device after it has been examined. This is due to some handsets having data stored on the memory card and if the memory card is not present, this could cause data loss from the handset. If time and resources allow, a bit-to-bit clone of the memory card should be created and that clone inserted into the handset. It is good practice that the SIM/IDEN card found in the device should remain outside of the exhibit for the duration of the examination so as to isolate the device from the mobile network. However, the majority of devices which contain SIM/IDEN cards require it to be present within them when they are powered on or they are susceptible to data loss. To combat this, a laboratory or cloned SIM/IDEN is created and used within the device so that the device notes the presence of a SIM/IDEN card, but yet is still not able to communicate with any mobile networks (for further isolation methods, see chapter 3.2.2.1). It is worth noting, if a device used an IDEN card, it is often necessary to further isolate the device with a Faraday Shield, especially if IDEN devices are common.

At this stage, if the device is supported by forensic solutions for a boot loader physical examination, this should be carried out. Often this can be carried out without the need for a SIM/IDEN card. This will allow the forensic solution to upload a boot loader to the device and boot the device in a particular way, which will allow for the full acquisition of the device’s internal memory without making any changes or alterations to the user data on the device. A physical examination of this nature can also potentially recover any device lock codes, such as PINs or patterns, which will allow the forensic examiner to gain full access to the device once it has been powered on.

If the device being examined is not supported for this type of examination, the device should be powered on whilst isolated from any networks. If user protection is encountered, and the PIN, password or pattern has not been provided alongside the device, the forensic examiner should Digital Forensics Guide attempt the best level of examination possible whilst bypassing the protection. If this is not possible, the user’s PIN, password or pattern will be required prior to examination. If the PIN, password or pattern is already known prior to examination, then this should be entered so that full access can be gained to the device. Again, the best level of examination should be undertaken to get the most data extracted out of the device. If obtaining the correct solution for the protection is not possible it may be necessary to attempt typical PINs or patterns in order to access the data.

This is not without risk, as many devices will implement secure data destruction should the wrong code be attempted too many times. Commercial tools are available that can “Brute-Force” passcodes, guessing all possible combinations until the correct one is found. When guessing passcodes, it is best to build a dictionary of probable passcodes from known facts (such as birthdates or other passcodes) or from known common passcodes (such as 1234, 1379, 0000 etc).

Depending on the extraction tool available and chosen, the acquisition process will vary. Most tools have a guide explaining the procedure that must be followed to create a successful extraction. It is important at all stages to minimise the effect on the electronic evidence and to attempt to preserve the integrity of the data to the highest standard possible. It is important to consider that for some mobile devices it may be necessary to modify system files or the operating system, or in some cases upload and install a dedicated application in order to successfully extract data from the devices. This process can cause some data to be irrecoverably lost; this is normally only system files with little to no evidential value. The knowledge of what is altered by any of these processes can be demonstrated by holding appropriate training certifications, such as training provided by the manufacturers of mobile forensics software, or practical experience involving the testing of what data, if any, on the device is altered by making these system changes.

Some additional, dedicated tools will include stand-alone extraction tools. More advanced examination techniques, such as JTAG or Chip-Off will require further tools, including soldering equipment and specialist jigs to read raw data from the device’s memory chips.

Digital Forensics Guide This method typically will allow the examiner to access live and deleted data, operating system files and areas of the device that are not normally accessible to the user.

Mobile devices, unlike computer devices, have further acquisition strategies. The other main strategy is a File System Dump (FSD). An FSD is like a hybrid of a Physical and a Logical acquisition. FSDs retrieve the devices file system and interpret the data during the processing stage. This allows examiners to retrieve, for example, databases holding deleted messages that may not be available at a logical acquisition and may not be accessible during a physical acquisition. However, not all deleted data that it would be possible to retrieve with a physical acquisition would be acquired during an FSD.

A logical acquisition of the mobile device will involve receiving information from the device and allowing the device to present the data for analysis. This is often the equivalent of accessing the data on the device itself. This method typically will only make live data available to the examiner. If no other method is available, a method termed “manual examination” can be used. This method involves accessing the device and recording the data displayed on the screen, with photographs, video recording or transcribing the data. Care should be taken to ensure that data is not unnecessarily changed and information is recorded accurately. With this method, you can only recover the data which the mobile device displays, for example some mobile devices will not show full time and date information.

For mobile devices that are damaged or locked, two other methodologies can be utilised. These are JTAG and Chip-Off examinations. JTAG examination requires the stripping down of the device to the device’s logical board and the soldering of connections to specified connections on the board.

This enables the examiner to retrieve a full physical copy of the data stored on the device. A chipoff also allows the extraction of a full physical copy of the device, but requires the permanent removal of the device’s memory chip from the memory board.

Another, less destructive modification that can be performed to some mobile devices is the process known as “Rooting” or “Jail Breaking” the device. This process involves leveraging features of the operating system to elevate the permissions of the running user (similar to the process of gaining “Root” access in a Linux computer). This process involves the modification of system files and can potentially damage the device and so should be low on the list of techniques leveraged.

The order of attempted extractions is important. Examiners should strive to conduct the examination method that is least destructive with the most yield first. This allows examiners to capture areas that might be damaged or overwritten at later stages. Methods of extraction such as JTAG and Chip-Off should only be considered as a last resort as, especially with Chip-Off, the process can be destructive and un-recoverable.

Digital Forensics Guide Another source of forensic evidence is a backup. Some users and devices will create backups of themselves on other devices, such as the subject’s computer. These backups can assist in building a time line of evidence and can also be used to gain access to a passcode locked device. It is also possible to analyse some backups as if the backups were a physical device. Allowing examiners to review data stored on a unusably damaged device or a device that cannot be accessed.

This will require the forensic examiner checking that the data that has been extracted by the forensic solution matches what is displayed on the device, such as the correct time/date information. This will identify any errors with the extracted data or if data is missing as often not all chat messages, such as Facebook Messenger chat threads, are extracted from the device. If there are any discrepancies then further extractions can be undertaken to try and acquire the missing or inaccurate data or a manual examination can be undertaken to manually record the data. Some additional data (like IMEI and application settings) are often best confirmed / acquired during this stage.

Once all the required data has been acquired from the device in an acceptable fashion, then the reports containing the desired data can be compiled and produced for the officer to review.

Prosecutor's considerations Since the ultimate goal of a digital forensics process is to produce evidence to prove or disprove disputed facts, electronic evidence must be obtained in compliance with existing legislation and best practices to ensure admissibility at trials.

Compliance with the existing legal framework on cybercrime is of paramount importance and it does not include only well-known laws, acts, bills and regulations concerning criminal justice. It also includes other areas of legislation which, at a first glance, do not have much in common with criminal law.

Cybercrime is and will be an ever-growing area of criminality. New types of crime as well as traditional forms of crime increasingly take place in cyber space. If evidence is gathered without respect to criminal law rules and provisions, it may be dismissed.

The responsible prosecutor, and to a certain extent forensic managers and staff, must be aware not only of the applicable criminal law framework, but very often about laws and by-laws which are regulating telecommunications, service provider operations, information technology, as well as international law related to substantive criminal law, procedural law and mutual legal assistance. For example, grounds for the retention of data and rules for their acquisition for criminal investigation purposes are often stipulated by laws or acts on electronic communications.

Processing stage During processing the forensic examiners may prioritise certain devices or data and will produce an exact copy or image of the content of any digital storage seized. Working on the duplicate (never the original) they can apply smart, case-specific filters (data mining) or they can just process the image (e.g. by recovering deleted files, mounting containers, breaking encryption, parsing application data like internet history, chat logs, etc.). Those processing steps are often times repeatable for specific categories of cases. Even though they are resource intensive needing a lot of computing power and time they can typically be run over-night, over the weekend or on a second forensic workstation that is not in use.

Processing of computer systems Not only the number of computer systems per household and organisations, but also the amount of storage in these computer systems is rising. Managing large amount of data while keeping the backlog short is a big challenge for digital forensics laboratories. That is why different processing approaching should be considered.

Triage in the digital forensics context is the process by which cases or activities are prioritised to determine which case, which exhibit and which type to data are to be examined firstly, secondly, etc. This process can include the possibility that some exhibits or data are not examined at all (exclusive triage) or that some data will just be analysed at a later stage (prioritising triage).

Triage considers the value of investigating, the complexity, the cost and the order in which the investigation should be accomplished.

While triaging offers some advantages there are also disadvantages that need to be addressed. A triage cannot replace a full examination. That is why triage should not be used on a daily basis.

Using only automated techniques to retrieve evidence and/or only examining a small sub-set of all data comes with the risk to miss evidence. Those disadvantages need to be explained to the investigator, prosecutor or judge and based on that information they need to decide in favour or against the triaging process for that particular case.

Digital Forensics Guide However, triage remains a valid method in order to cope with a situation that could not be solved in any other way. Examples for such situations include: a huge amount of exhibits to be analysed in a very short time frame exhibits cannot be stored any longer because of legal issues getting information as quickly as possible is of highest priority (e.g. in terrorist cases) A triaging process is typically conducted by booting up several exhibits at the same time using a forensic boot medium. The medium should ideally be configured to run several pre-defined tasks (e.g. search for child abuse material using hash comparison, other tasks see chapter 3.3.1.4) automatically without the need for the examiner to observe the process. It should then write the report with its' findings to an attached USB medium. This way a forensic examiner can process multiple exhibits at the same time, even overnight or on weekends. The analyst can concentrate his/her resources on the setup of the triaging process for the exhibits and can view the reports of previously processed computers while the new chunk of exhibits is being processed by the triage boot medium automatically.

The automated processing includes tasks like: mounting of containers (e.g. ZIP, RAR, etc) extraction and parsing of various artefacts (e.g. mailboxes, internet history, etc) signature analysis Digital Forensics Guide recovering deleted files and folders recovering deleted partitions carving for certain file types indexing of keywords OCR of PDF files creation of thumbnail pictures for quicker viewing by the analyst extracting pictures from videos skin-tone detection for videos hash comparison (see chapter 3.3.1.6) While a streamlined approach is possible it is not necessary in all cases.

Filtering can also be applied when only certain types of traces are relevant for the case. Files can be filtered by signature analysis, by size, by date, by owner, etc.

Processing of mobile devices As with the processing of computer exhibits, the number and storage capacity of mobile phones per household is increasing. Along with this increase, the added functionality and reliance on mobile devices leads to a wealth of data available for forensic analysis. Examples of this data are locations and communication logs.

Prosecutor's considerations The processing stage can be of vital importance to the prosecution. Although technical data (evidence) is very much needed, one should not forget that the complete picture of the case is and should be with prosecutor during the investigation phase. Forensic expert staff in the laboratory may or may not be acquainted with legal requirements, or may or may not be part of the law enforcement. The prosecutor, on the other hand, more often would not be specialised in questions of information and communication technologies.

Therefore, the prosecutor should, if necessary, consult directly with the laboratory already for provisional findings. The laboratory staff, police and prosecutors will should cooperate to discover and understand the full picture of the case.

Often prosecutors will not have enough time to take this approach because of everyday routines. Nevertheless, especially in more complex cases and in cases of higher public importance, prosecutors will need to be closely involved and closely lead forensic investigations within the limits of the law.

Prosecutors must be aware that given the equality of arms the defence will be examining forensic findings, including provisional conclusions, which may be challenged thoroughly at the trial stage.

Analysis stage During the analysis phase the examiner actually searches for electronic evidence on the images.

This step can be very time consuming and can require a lot of expert knowledge to interpret traces from a variety of file systems, operating systems and applications. A lot of different factors have an influence on the time and workload that is needed for the analysis phase. Those factors include: the amount of storage media to be analysed, the size of the storage media, the complexity of the file systems being used, the level of usage of the operating system, the sophistication of the user, complexity of software and techniques being used by the computer user, etc.

Analysing computer systems Computer systems are used by humans for all sorts of activities: writing documents, accounting, surfing the internet, chatting, writing e-mails, gaming, viewing and editing images and videos and so on. That is why they can hold a lot of evidential data. Analysing a computer system, the digital forensic analyst can typically not only find traces in relation to the case but could potentially also find evidence regarding the intention of a perpetrator (e.g. by finding internet searches on how to commit the crime).

To get a better idea of the kinds of digital traces that an examiner might discover during forensic analysis, it makes sense to distinguish between two types of digital traces: Avoidable traces: These are traces that are stored by the operation system and applications by default, but which a system can be configured not to store. Take a web browser as an example.

This software will store a suspect’s browsing history as well as details of his or her downloads, form inputs, cookies, etc., but it can either be disabled or deleted by the suspect. Another example can be the “Start” menu and the suspect’s Office programs that ‘remember’ which files the suspect has opened recently. There are various types of ‘avoidable’ traces automatically stored on the hard disk in this way (as shown in the table below). However, they can be prevented by someone who knows what they are doing.

Unavoidable traces: By contrast, unavoidable traces are, of course, those that cannot be disabled or those that require considerable effort to stop temporarily. The probability of finding such traces is correspondingly high even if a suspect has tried to cover his or her tracks.

Digital Forensics Guide The following table lists some examples for avoidable and unavoidable traces: Avoidable traces Unavoidable traces Thumb caches Slacks Most recently used lists Unallocated space Log files MFT entries Browser histories

Browser caches Some application traces Most Used programs Form Data Pagefile.sys Hiberfil.sys Volume shadow copies 3.4.1.2 Procedures for different traces Every case typically involves some particularly relevant traces. In a fraud case for example documents, spreadsheets and e-mails are typically more relevant while in child-abuse cases pictures, videos and communication traces are more relevant. But even within those categories of cases not every case is the same. That is why the following subchapters included information on procedures based on the type of type that is relevant rather than the type of case.

E-Mails To analyse e-mail communication it is not only important to analyse mail clients like Outlook, Thunderbird or Mail but also webmail accounts. The former will be covered in this subchapter while the latter will be covered in section 3.4.1.2.4.

In order to analyse an e-mail client it is important to know which artefact that e-mail client produces. Outlook for example stores evidential data in personal folder files such as PST, OST and PAB files while Thunderbird stores messages in mbox files. The forensic software suites can usually parse those files. However, they do not necessarily extract all messages. Some forensic tools, for example, have problems extracting deleted messages from personal folder files.

Office documents In cases in which office documents are of importance the digital forensics analyst should conduct a signature analysis and then afterwards filter for the files of interest (e.g. files with a docx signature). When the forensic analyst has found those files it is good practice depending on the policies of the office to extract all of those files and hand it over to the case investigator for a content analysis. When the case officer has identified the relevant documents the forensic analyst Digital Forensics Guide can search for further evidence of when those documents have been produced, by which user they have been produced and whether they have been sent or received by other persons.

Pictures / videos Most forensics software solutions offer support for analysing masses of pictures and videos. After an initial file signature analysis and setting a filter for pictures and video files, the forensics analyst can use a gallery view to inspect the thumbnails of all pictures for case relevant evidence. For a faster analysis of video files certain software offers the feature of extracting still pictures from the videos (e.g. every X seconds/minutes depending on the settings). These extracted images can then be viewed in a gallery view as well.

If the case requires searching for a set of known pictures (e.g. child abuse material or stolen blueprints, etc), hash comparison can be used to accomplish this task. There are even techniques available that enable searching for similar pictures with another hash value (fuzzy hashing, similarity hashes, PhotoDNA, etc.).

In cases where location data or production details of pictures and video files are important the analyst should consider extracting meta-data (e.g. exif data) for those files. In fact analysing meta data and putting evidence into context in the major task for the forensic analyst in cases that involve pictures or videos as evidence. The simple task of viewing the contents of the pictures/videos does not require any digital forensic expertise and could thus be done by responsible case investigator. Besides that the categorisation of images or further investigation may be carried out by the investigating officer if facilities are supplied.

Internet browser Internet browsers are of evidential value for a lot of cases. They typically contain the following artefacts which need to be analysed: Website visit history Local cache / temporary internet files Bookmarks / favorites Sessions information Cookies Saved usernames and passwords Entries from form fields Internet searches Analysing browser artefacts can be important for suggesting purpose or intent (e.g. keywords used in search engines could prove intent). That is why those artefacts should be analysed in most cases.

Digital Forensics Guide The most popular browsers are Google Chrome, Microsoft Internet Explorer / Edge, Mozilla Firefox and Apple Safari. All of them store their data in all operating systems within the user home directory. Except for the Microsoft browsers they all use SQLite databases to store the artefacts mentioned above.

Even though most forensic software can parse these browser artefacts to some extent, they differ quite a lot in a) which versions of the browsers they can parse and b) which detail of information they can extract from each browser artefact. This is why it is important for the forensic examiner to understand the underlying structure of those artefacts. Most browsers nowadays work on the basis of SQLite databases. The forensic examiner should search for those artefacts and parse them manually using SQLite database browsers. This ability not only makes him/her independent of particular tools or the wait for updates to those tools but also allows him/her to create their own reports and to cross-check the result of the tools.

Software artefacts Whenever certain software can add evidential value to the case, the artefacts of those programs need to be analysed. Examples of such software include communication software (e.g. Skype), steganography software (e.g. OpenStego), password safes (e.g. KeePass), file sharing software (e.g. uTorrent), crypto currency software (e.g. Bitcoin wallet), etc. It is not possible to describe procedures how to analyze all potential software. The basic approach is to research trusted sources for information on how to analyses that particular software. In a next step the findings and the interpretation of the data need to be verified

User activity The operating system of a computer tracks user activity at many different places. Examples for that include: power on and shutdown times software settings most recently used files lists device usage user logins Wi-Fi connections preferred programs setup of user environment and many more.

Analysing this user activity helps getting a better understand of the user behavior and can even prove evidential activities. Depending on the operating system that has been used on the computer those artefacts are stored in various locations. In Microsoft Windows the Registry, Event Logs, Digital Forensics Guide JumpLists and several other files need to be analysed by the examiner. On OS X systems the analyst will find most of the evidence in the Library and log folders while on Linux systems most of the data will wither be stored in the user home folder, the "/etc" and the "/var" directories.

Log files Analysing log files is essential particularly in cases of attacks against systems. Digital forensics analyst should extract not only allocated log files but also traces of deleted/unallocated log files.

Specialised software is available for log file analysis. The basis of such an analysis is to either search for particular keywords, to search for abnormal pattern or to search the logs that fall within a set time frame.

Encryption All operating systems are offering built-in encryption facilities nowadays. It is easy for the user to activate a full disk encryption for a system drive. If possible passwords or encryption keys should either be obtained by the suspect or should be acquired by using live data forensics on scene. It can also be helpful to extract other passwords (e.g. browser passwords) from the disk where possible. These passwords and their permutations can be used to create a dictionary to conduct an attack using specialised password cracking techniques.

Unallocated areas Unallocated areas can contain artefacts of all of the types of evidence mentioned above. Searching and extracting of certain file types in unallocated areas can be automated by carving software.

Digital forensics analysts should precisely specify what kind of files they are searching for because data carving is a very time consuming task. Data carving does not work well on fragmented files.

Most of the times data found in unallocated areas cannot be an associated with a certain user or even a location within a folder structure.

The forensic analyst could even find situations where not a single byte of data can be retrieved from a company’s computers because they will merely be client computers without any storage media of their own, but using the resources of a virtual machine in the cloud. The advantage with this is that, technically, the virtual machine can be easily copied. Depending on the relevant and applicable legislation, however, identifying and obtaining the appropriate legal authorisation for intercepting such data might be a problem. It may also be challenging to ensure that the data have been acquired in compliance with the legal procedures in the requesting country.

Another disadvantage is that there are likely to be far less recoverable data available to find.

Indeed if a suspect were to create a temporary virtual machine for committing his or her crimes and then to delete that machine, there might be no evidence at all to recover.

Digital Forensics Guide The possibility to acquire and analyse data that is remotely stored is highly depending on the legislation and jurisdiction. In some jurisdictions for example the forensic analyst - under certain circumstances - is allowed to connect to the remote storage using the suspect's credentials from the computer in order to acquire the data from the cloud provider. Other jurisdictions will not accept such an acquisition. In those cases the official channels can be used in order to request preservation and access to the data from the provider.

Understanding memory structures of different operating systems in order to analyse RAM is a highly technical task. That is why it should only be done by examiners who are qualified for this work. Specialised software is requited to analyse RAM dumps. Examples for such software include "Volatility" and "Rekall". Typical artefacts that can be extracted from RAM dumps include: Running processes including their memory Process information (e.g. handles) Encryption keys Opened files Usernames, passwords Unsaved documents and many more.

The forensic analyst should ensure that the image is mounted write-protect with a write cache allowing the virtual operating system to write log files and changes to that write cache without affecting the integrity of the image. Some operating systems refuse to start in virtual environments. This can typically be solved by replacing drivers and adapting configurations, using software like OpenGates and OpenJobs. Should the virtual operating system start with a password prompt the forensic analyst needs to either crack that password or blank it.

Relationship diagrams: Can give answers to the questions: Who has met whom at which point of time using which medium? Which information was sent/received? Who knows whom? Who is the main suspect who coordinated the others? Moneyflow diagrams: Can help to understand at which point of time which amount of money has been sent over which channel by which persons.

Communication diagrams: Similar to a relationshop diagram but does not necessarily involve persons. It could show how often which IP addresses attacked a server from which country.

Graphical representations make it easier to understand the correlation between the data. They can also enable the investigator to find new links. Typically the basis for such diagrams are raw data which are stored in a structured way, e.g. csv/tsv files. Those files are loaded into specialised commercial or some free software. On Linux for example simple commands like awk, sort, uniq used in conjunction with Graphviz or dot can help drawing graphical representations.

Analysing mobile devices Mobile devices contain records and logs of communications, along with times and dates of said communications. In addition to this, mobile devices will also contain media files and location data that can be utilised in an investigation.

Contacts Contact lists make up the backbone of mobile phone usage. Care should be taken to crossreference other artifacts of data back to contact lists to help identify subjects for investigation.

Contacts can include other communication channels, identity information as well as pictures to assist in the identification of individuals. Contacts can also help to identify association between subjects and potentially identify how long such an association has been in place from the created dates of contacts.

Call logs Call records often carry date/time stamps generated from the handsets internal clock. This can make recovered time/date stamps for call records unreliable. It is often best practice to obtain billing information from a mobile service provider to confirm time and date information for call records. This time stamp is obtained from the mobile service provider’s servers and so can be considered accurate (or rather it is more likely to be accurate).

Application artifacts Due to the amount of different applications and the multitude of application versions that are available, it is often necessary to analyse different artifacts unique to different applications. Many of these applications will, for example, store settings in database files. It may be the case that deleted database files are recovered and these can be used to ascertain the settings of an application at a given point in the past. Due to the closed nature of many applications and the lack of available information, it may often be necessary to obtain a test device and conduct some live research in order to identify the properties of some application artifacts.

E-mail messages As with computer examinations, e-mail communications on mobile devices can be used within default Mail applications and through web mail accessed through the internet browser. On some devices, such as newer Apple iPhones, the extraction of email messages from the default Mail application is not supported. In these cases the examiner will have to manually record the data or attempt to gather this data from other sources.

Web history Internet browsers on mobile devices typically store the following information that potentially has evidential value: Web history entries Web page visit counts Bookmarks / favorites Cookies Digital Forensics Guide The majority of this information, such as visit counts and cookies, are not accessible on most devices.

Prosecutor's considerations The analysis stage is of the vital importance for the identification and acquisition of evidence used for the investigation and trial phases of criminal proceedings. One of the most important things to be considered should be cataloguing of the steps and evidence which is gathered and secured.

Often evidence will be present in great numbers and their bulleting and listing can be time consuming. Nevertheless, one must be persistent in this process having in mind that this approach will lead to a logical explanation of the chain of evidence and the criminal act itself.

The interpretation of the evidence must be taken very seriously and its importance well understood. Forensic staff must be aware they will be summoned by the court and be in a position to explain their procedures and findings in detail; their statements will be examined both by the prosecution and defence, and, depending on the system, by the judiciary. This situation can be of crucial importance for the success or failure of the case and it must be taken seriously.

The analysis of the evidence should lead to clear and logical conclusions which should be able to sustain significant examination during the trial.

Presentation stage After evidence has been found in the analysis stage, the examiner needs to create a report for the trial. The examiner’s job is to illustrate and to translate complicated technical contexts into facts that judges, prosecutors and other parties involved can easily understand. They may also be expected to interpret those facts and to express an opinion on their meaning.

Admissibility of electronic evidence Although the details may differ from jurisdiction to jurisdiction (some might even not admit electronic evidence at all), the following criteria should generally be taken into account when evaluating electronic evidence for trial: Authenticity: The evidence must establish facts in a way that cannot be disputed and is representative of its original state.

Completeness: The analysis of or any opinion based on the evidence must tell the whole story and not be tailored to match a more favourable or desired perspective.

Digital Forensics Guide Reliability: There must be nothing about the way in which the evidence was collected and subsequently handled that may cast doubt on its authenticity or veracity.

Believability: The evidence must be persuasive as to the facts it represents and the finders of fact in the court process must be able to rely on it as the truth.

Proportionality: The methods used to gather the evidence must be fair and proportionate to the interests of justice: the prejudice (i.e. the level of intrusion or coercion) caused to the rights of any party should not outweigh the “probative value” of the evidence (i.e. its value as proof).

Report writing The digital forensics report reflects all the procedures and outcomes of the steps that have been conducted before. It is the only one outcome of all the prior work and as such it is the key element for all other persons within the criminal justice system.

The nature of the report that it is being used in courts to help proving guilt or innocence of a person does not only make it an extremely important document but also causes some challenges for the forensic analyst. One of the biggest challenges is to make the report understandable for non-technical people. So a forensic report must be written in clear, understandable language and should have a summary indication in a compact format what has been found during the examination. All technical details can be listed in an appendix. It is important that the digital forensics analyst does not state something in the report that he cannot prove, e.g. "The suspect has done A, B, C"; it is only possible to state "With this computer, at this point of time, using user account XY, file A has been created, USB thumb drive B has been attached and in inbox of webmail account C has been visited." A digital forensics report should consist of the following main chapters:

Result An exemplary layout of a report has been attached to this document in appendix J.

In the digital forensics laboratory it should be clearly defined who is responsible for the report and who will be delivering the evidence in court. Typically that is the same person who’s name is on the report and who signed it. In addition to that quality assurance measures should be followed before the report is completed and submitted.

Expert witness status An expert witness, professional witness or judicial expert is a witness, who by virtue of education, training, skill, or experience, is believed to have expertise and specialised knowledge in a particular Digital Forensics Guide subject beyond that of the average person, sufficient that others may officially and legally rely upon the witness's specialised (scientific, technical or other) opinion about an evidence or fact issue within the scope of his expertise, referred to as the expert opinion, as an assistance to the factfinder. In some jurisdictions, expert status is decided on each and every case by the trial judge and the person is only an expert in that case. In other jurisdictions, expert status has a more long lasting status, by virtue of appointment as, for example a court expert.3 Evidence involving complex issues of science and technology plays an increasing role in litigation.

That is why some countries and courts maintain lists of appointed experts. Appointing an expert is often suggested as a means for the court to enhance its ability to deal with such issues. 4 The rights and duties of an expert witness typically differ from country to country. It is important for the digital forensics analysts to make themselves familiar with their legislation, their court procedures, their role and their rights and duties in that role.

Alternative presentation methods Some courts allow the usage of alternative presentation methods. Those can include explanatory media such as live demonstrations on computers with projectors, virtual machines, etc. If wanted, accepted and necessary, it is vital to discuss those possibilities with the judge before the hearing.

It is also very important to be confident in the usage of those techniques and to have tested them before the hearing. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expert_witness http://www.fjc.gov/public/pdf.nsf/lookup/13.expert.pdf/$File/13.expert.pdf Digital Forensics Guide Prosecutor’s considerations If the aim of the investigation was two-fold, to obtain all existing and qualitative evidence with regard to the case and to be able to reproduce and explain forensic procedures which led to the acquisition, the trial phase is the one confirming the quality or lack of quality of the acquired evidence.

Admissibility of evidence represents the key outcome of the digital forensic process.

Prosecutors and judges are becoming increasingly comfortable with the existence and admission of such electronic evidence. In some jurisdictions, not only is it that electronic evidence is explicitly allowed by the criminal justice, but there are references and definitions of computers, computer networks, software, hardware and data in substantive and procedural parts of the legal framework. Also, in some jurisdictions, computer data is defined as a movable object, to which all legal rules for tangible items can apply (destruction, alteration, theft, alienation, exchange, etc.).

Some legal opinions about electronic evidence may consider it non-usable because of the possibility of alteration and forgery. Under this logic, any other evidence could be questioned as well. Forgeries of paper documents are widespread. Fingerprint forgery, alteration of photographic, video and audio materials is common. In that sense, electronic evidence should not be regarded as more volatile or unreliable, especially having in mind that as society, industry and technology advance, more and more of traces, facts and evidence will exist in digital form. Therefore, admissibility of electronic evidence as real evidence should not represent an issue for prosecutor or judiciary, provided that the procedures described in this Guide are followed.

The authenticity and reliability of electronic evidence must be ensured throughout the digital forensics process. Forensic staff should have knowledge or/and pay attention to the existence of an authentic search and seizure order (warrant) by a prosecutor or judge, records of searched and seized places, items and taken actions, acknowledgement (if applicable) of a suspect or person in possession of seized items, that records are authentic, and so forth. Photographic or video recordings from the place were a search was conducted and other documents and measures, if required by law, can also establish that understanding. Furthermore, the authenticity of electronic evidence is preserved only if digital forensic laboratory staff continue with actions which are carefully organised, executed and recorded.

Completeness of the evidence can also sometimes represent a difficult task, since some parts of the evidence can be missing due to different factors and reasons, including influence of the suspect and other persons involved in the actual case. On such occasions, Digital Forensics Guide forensic staff should concentrate on best possible approach to existing items and their contents in order to extract the most comprehensive body of facts, without distortion or bias.

Credibility is closely connected to authenticity and reliability and must be ensured in writing. Written reports should provide clear explanations, logical connections and trustable outcomes of procedures and conclusions as a result of the process. The forensic examiner should always be aware that in case of court summoning, a verbal presentation of the findings and testing of the believability will most probably occur. In such a case, an examiner should possess thorough knowledge of the report, procedures and conclusions.

An examiner presenting and explaining findings in court or before the prosecution should have certain skills for verbal presentations. He/she must bear in mind that the judge and all parties present in the courtroom will carefully listen and follow not only the examiner’s words, but his/her appearance and overall impression as well.

Of course, proportionality is expected. Any unauthorised intrusion or coercive measure will most certainly lead to the inadmissibility of evidence. Also, by following good practices of the rule of law, facts and evidence which are in favour of the defence should be presented and made available to the defence as well.

When it comes to report writing, it is of the outmost importance that the language is clear and understandable, but not diluted to the point where quality of the evidence will be lost. In most situations, defence attorneys will object to more complex language of the report and will try to advocate for additional examination for clarifying the initial report.

This is one of the frequent techniques for prolonging the trial in cases when a prison sentence is expected. Any decision about this motion will be in the hands of the judge (rarely - prosecutors), and examiners should be ready such a development. In such a case, the content of the request should be carefully analysed and appropriate actions should be taken, without prejudice to the principal task of forensic analysis as requested by prosecutor or judge.

The forensic expert must take into account that not many prosecutors and even a smaller number of judges feel comfortable with cybercrime, electronic evidence, digital forensics reports and similare, and that in many cases the natural reaction is to reject the facts; in this case, such issues should be more thoroughly explained in person during the expert testimony. Forensic experts must be prepared and flexible on such occasions.

Te expert witness status will vary from country to country. In some systems, experts are engaged by the prosecution and defence, in some systems they are court-appointed, and there is number of mixed systems in which all parties and the court alike can appoint or hire expert at different stages of the proceedings.

However, it is a very likely scenario that expert witness coming from the forensics laboratory of the state authority will be engaged by the prosecution or court. This also Digital Forensics Guide means that the defence is likely to engage expert witnesses of their own, who will challenge most, if not all, aspects of the expert examination. This kind of situation is becoming more and more frequent in courtrooms and forensic experts must be prepared for this.

Alternative presentation methods are depending on the technical facilities of the court but not only there. Plea bargaining and, in some countries, the growing popularity of “deferred prosecution” can lead to presentations in Prosecution Offices as well. Forensic experts must be aware that conditions for presentation are not always perfect. Many court and prosecution rooms are not equipped with hardware to support complex presentations. Expert must be prepared to present the same quality of evidence with less technical possibilities. Situations like this should be anticipated by the forensic laboratory and certified mobile equipment for such presentations can be a useful option.

In conclusion, the presentation stage should be a goal and outcome of all efforts of the forensic laboratory, examiners and support staff, and should always be on the mind of the personnel involved. The facts and evidence will serve the task for establishing the material or substantive truth, depending on the legal system. Thez will be used for the adjudication of the criminal case, for justice and for the compensation of victims.

The role and responsibility of digital forensic examiners are thus crucial for criminal justice.

Appendix A - Comparison of forensic software All appendices in section A are templates and should aid laboratory managers to develop their own comparison matrix in order to make an educated decision about software, hardware and training purchases. In some tables, exemplary data are provided for better understanding. It is important to understand that each forensic laboratory might have its’ own prerequisites, demands and maybe even legal framework (e.g. mandatory list of court-validated software). While one lab might have a majority of cases involving recovery of files and filesystems another lab might only have cases where large amounts of documents and e-mails might need to be analysed. While the first laboratory might choose one particular forensic software that suits their requirements (excellent data carving, file system support and recovery capabilities) the other laboratory might aim for another solution that fits their demands better. There cannot be one definite recommendation for a specific software that is the universal best solution for all digital forensic laboratories.

Please remember that results from each individual software should be double-checked. The ideal situation is that the results are double-checked by manually analysing the raw data.

Depending on the data and on the knowledge of the examiner this might not be possible in any case. In this case the results of the first tool should be checked against the results of a second tool. Some legislations even require dual-tool verification legally. Thus, it is good practise to have more than one forensic software available at a forensic lab in order to crosscheck the results.

A.1) Available software for digital forensics laboratories A variety of different software is needed in order to run a digital forensics laboratory. This includes case management software as well as feature-packed suites for computer and mobile forensics.

Depending on the tasks of the laboratory additional specialised software may be required. The number of forensic big and small software solutions is huge and very agile. Especially the open source community is publishing new tools nearly every day. It is not the aim of this guide to provide a full list of all available tools. However, to provide a better overview that can assist in the development of a comparison matrix a list of useful resources is given below.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Computer Forensics Tool Catalog https://toolcatalog.nist.gov/index.php National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Computer Forensic Tool Testing (CFTT) https://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/nist-cftt-reports DFIR Training Website http://www.dfir.training/index.php/tools/forensic-suites Awesome Forensics list https://github.com/Cugu/awesome-forensics Forensicswiki http://www.forensicswiki.org/wiki/Tools Forensicfocus http://www.forensicfocus.com/software A.2) Cost overview of standard software for forensic analysis Remember: All costs for software, hardware and training are reoccurring expenses. While the initial purchase of a forensic software is usually a one-time cost the reoccurring costs for annual license renewals should never be forgotten. Since the prices for license updates and service subscriptions may differ significantly depending on the product it is important to pay attention to those costs. Besides that, hardware needs to be renewed on a regular basis in order to maximise the performance of the evidence processing and to meet the requirements of updated forensic software. In addition to that even the training costs are reoccurring because digital forensics examiners need continuous professional education.

Forensic Analysis Mobile Forensics Browser for investigator Case management Purchase:

License Updates: EUR / year Hardware costs Training costs (see table A.4) Requirements: Operating system: Disks: Preferred training option: Hardware costs: Product B Purchase:

Requirements: Operating system: Disks: Hardware costs: Preferred training option: Requirements: Operating system: Disks: Hardware costs: EUR/day/person EUR/day/person

Requirements: Operating system: Disks: Hardware costs: Product C Training: Travel: Preferred training option: Training: Travel:

EUR/day/person EUR/day/person A.3) Forensic software functionality comparison matrix Functionality Signature analysis Product A Product B Product C Product D e.g. +++ Hash-Comparison Carving Imaging Mounting of container files File system support Partition recovery RAID recovery Encryption support Usability Indexing E-Mail analysis Internet traces (Browser, Messenger) Viewing of pictures Native view of file contents Bookmarking / Tagging Reporting Support for investigator analysis Timelining Categorisation Filter Mounting of images Extentability Easy of setup Skin tone detection Archiving of cases Support / Updates Low risk for discontinuation of product $ = optional Add-On with extra cost A.4) Overview of training costs Product Training option Cost per participant Pros / Cons Product A Training manufacturer

Appendix B - Exemplary Device Carrying Case contents Exemplary Device Carrying Case Contents:

One disk duplicator USB protocol module One IDE - SATA write-protection bridge One USB Ultra write-protection bridge One SCSI Ultra write-protection bridge One SAS Ultra write-protection bridge Four 3.5 inches harddrives Two power supplies for disk duplicators Four write-protection bridge power supplies IDE, SATA, SCSI, USB, firewire data cables and adapters

Appendix G - Chain of custody record EXHIBITING INSTRUCTIONS Each item seized will have an exhibit label attached which should be completed at the scene.

The first person to take possession of an article should exhibit that item. They will give it their exhibit reference number.

These exhibit reference numbers must be unique and should consist of the person’s initials from their first name and given name followed by a sequential number starting at 1, e.g., the first exhibit from Anne Browne would be AB/1. Each person who refers to or handles the exhibit must sign the exhibit label.

Each exhibit must have a unique reference number, which should be used by all people subsequently referring to that item.

An operative will need to show in court that an item seized at the scene is the same item produced at court.

Therefore it is very important when an article is handed to another person or deposited, such transactions are fully documented.

Any person receiving an exhibited item must sign the relevant exhibit label, therefore maintaining the chain of custody.

Any person who refers to an exhibit in a subsequent report or statement must include the exhibit reference number.

If identical items are found at the same time and place they may be grouped together under the same exhibit reference number, however care should be taken to ensure that grouped items are correctly counted, e.g., thirtyfour (34) CDs.

QUESTIONING / INTERVIEWS All questions and answers entries regarding exhibits must be recorded contemporaneously.

At the conclusion of a seizure any person questioned should be asked if they would initial each answer and sign the bottom of each page if correct and write after the final entry words such as “I agree that this is a correct record of what was said” and append his/her signature.

In cases where a person refuses to initial or sign an entry the senior person present should initial each answer and sign each page.

If questions and answers cannot be written in one entry, continue into the next column below. A diagonal line should be drawn through the exhibit entry column.

Place deposited Person depositing Other reference I have initialled each answer, which has been correctly recorded.

Appendix H - Image Acquisition Worksheet Image Acquisition Worksheet CASE INFORMATION Project ID (1): Project / Matter Name (2): Custodian Name (3): Project Manager (5): TARGET COMPUTER INFORMATION Location of System (6): System Type (7): Desktop Laptop Server Other: Evidence Type (8): Hard Drive CD/DVD Floppy

Logged On Other: Other: BIOS Date /Time (10): Current Date/Time (11): Total Number of Hard Drives in CPU (12): Hard Drive Removed by (13): Photographs Taken (14):

No - reason: CONSENT I hereby authorize (enter agency name) (and their representatives) to take possession of all computer equipment necessary for their investigation. (4) Signature Position Print Name Date /Time (xx) see Guidance Notes COMPUTER HARD DRIVE / OTHER Manufacturer: Model Number: Serial Number: IMAGE ACQUISITION INFORMATION Acquired by (21): Imaging Location (22): Acquisition EnCase (v.

Method (23): dd Image Logical File Copy Other: Acquisition Writeblocker Firewire W/B Bootdisk Hardware (24): SCSI-IDE W/B XOver Cable Other: Evidence Media (25): Hard Drive FTK (v.

X-Ways: Direct Connection Other: Serial Number (25): Evidence Disk Drive ID Number (25): Size of Hard Drive (26):

Hash Value (30): (xx) see Guidance Notes NOTES This section is available to add additional notes that are not included in the standard form, or to expand upon notes, i.e. types of errors received, problems encountered during imaging process.

Image Acquisition Worksheet Guidance Notes The standard (enter agency name) Image Acquisition Worksheet is to be used during any forensic acquisition (imaging) of a hard drive or other type of media.

Matter Name - refers to the “code” name assigned by the project manager Custodian Name - refers to the end user assigned the computer Consent - if consent is required to obtain the machine, obtain a signature of the person releasing the machine Manager - refers to the assigned Project Manager leading the case TARGET COMPUTER INFORMATION

Location of System - address of site, may include office number if computer was taken directly from an office System Type - indicates whether the machine is a desktop, laptop, server, etc. If the device is a standalone drive, check ‘other’ and write in ‘stand alone drive’ Evidence Type - mark the device to be imaged/copied System State - indicates whether the suspect machine was on, off, logged on, etc. If the machine is on, indicate who powered the machine down BIOS Date/Time - refers to the bios from the suspect machine Current Date/Time - refers to the date and time from the examiner’s computer Total number of hard drives in the computer - self explanatory Hard Drive Removed by - indicate who disassembled the computer Photographs Taken - please indicate whether photographs were taken of the computer and the hard drive. If the answer is no, you must explain why no photographs were taken COMPUTER 15. Manufacturer of Target Computer - type of machine and size of hard drive 16. Model Number - model number of computer 17. Serial Number - serial number from computer. If more than one serial number on the machine, copy them all HARD DRIVE/OTHER 18. Manufacturer - type of hard drive 19. Model Number - model number of hard drive 20. Serial Number - serial number from the hard drive. If more than one serial number exists, copy them all ACQUISITION INFORMATION (this will be completed twice, once for each image).

Appendix I - Digital Forensics Analysis Form / Spreadsheet Action Date/Time Date/Time Signature started Official request/order received Check Notes completed By whom: Notes:

Parameters: specific processing and searching defined Automated processing of images Partition recovery File recovery Mounting of containers Signature analysis Hash analysis Hash sets used: Other processing tasks Other processing tasks: Forensic analysis Total GB/TB analysed: Analysis of E-Mails (if applicable) Analysis

Internet Browsers (if applicable) Analysis of User-Activity (if applicable) Keyword search performed Keywords: applicable) Index created Analysis of Messenger (if applicable) Analysis of databases (if applicable) Analysis of log files (if applicable) Malware check? applicable) Encryption check? applicable) Virtualisation applicable) Analysis

Appendix J - Digital Forensics Report Template YOUR FORENSIC UNITS HEADER Barcode Case Ref.: Lab Ref: Report No: Examiner: DD/MM/YYYY Forensic analysis report 1. Case information 1.1. Case background 1.2. Request 1.3. Mandate 2. Exhibits 2.1. Exhibit 1 2.1.1.Photos 2.1.2.Description 2.2. Exhibit 2 2.2.1.Photos 2.2.2.Description 3. Examination methods 3.1. Personnel 3.1.1.Qualifications 3.2. Hardware 3.2.1.Write-Blocker 3.2.2.Forensic Station 3.2.3.Other Hardware used Case Ref: Signature: YOUR FORENSIC UNITS FOOTER 3.3. Software 3.3.1.Imaging Software 3.3.2.Processing Software 3.3.3.Analysis Software 3.3.4.Other Software used 4. Acquisition process 4.1. Image of Exhibit 1 4.1.1.Actions taken 4.1.2.Result of hash verification 4.2. Image of Exhibit 1 4.2.1.Actions taken 4.2.2.Result of hash verification 5. Analysis process

Analysis of Messenger (if applicable) 5.10. Analysis of databases (if applicable) 5.11. Analysis of log files (if applicable) 5.12. Malware check? (if applicable) 5.13. Encryption check? (if applicable) 5.14. Virtualisation (if applicable) 5.15. Analysis of other communication data (if applicable) 6. Results Appendices a) Printout of findings b) Glossary c) Report about technical details Case Ref: Signature: YOUR FORENSIC UNITS FOOTER For further templates see: Streamlined Forensic Report Toolkit, http://www.cps.gov.uk/legal/s_to_u/scientific_evidence/sfr_guidance_and_toolkit/ Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 1 of 102 EXHIBIT A Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 2 of 102 I wilStroz Friedberg Expert Report

Civil Action No: 1:10-cv-00569-RJA March 26, 2012 Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 3 of 102 Table of Contents

The Work for Hire Document Was Not Found on the Ceglia Media ... 10 VII. The StreetFax Contract (Ceglia Media) ... 11

Other Evidence on the Ceglia Media Establishes the Authenticity of the StreetFax Contract and the StreetFax Emails ... 15 VIII. The StreetFax Contract (Sidley Austin) ... 18

Sidley Austin Produced Copies of the StreetFax Emails and the Attached StreetFax Contract 18

The Internet Headers of the StreetFax Emails Confirm That They Were Routed Through Sidley Austin’s and Adelphia’s Servers on March 3, 2004 ... 19

The Metadata of the PST File in Which the StreetFax Emails Were Located Supports the Authenticity of the Emails ... 22

All Three Word Documents Containing the Text of the Purported Emails Are Backdated ... 24

The Six Other Versions of the Work For Hire Document Are Backdated ... 35 Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325

Filed 03/26/12 Page 4 of 102 All Seven Versions of the Work For Hire Document Have Significant Formatting Differences Between Page 1 And Page 2 ... 36

All Seven Versions of the Work For Hire Document Differ From Other Contracts Between StreetFax and Third-Parties Found on the Ceglia Media ... 37 XII. Other Evidence of Electronic Forgery ... 39

One of the Versions of the Work for Hire Document Contains Metadata That Reveals Mr.

Backdating of the System Clock on the Computer that Contained the Seagate Hard Drive ... 43 XIII. Evidence of Spoliation ... 46

There Were Multiple Reinstallations of the Windows Operating System on the Seagate Hard Drive During the Pendency of Litigation ... 46

Deletion of Data From getzuck@gmail.com Webmail Account ... 48 XIV. Evidence of Undisclosed Media ... 49

Recovered Deleted Files ... 52 XV. Evidence Rebutting Paul Ceglia’s Allegations ... 53 XVI. Conclusion... 56 Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325

Filed 03/26/12 Page 5 of 102 Introduction On April 11, 2011, Paul Ceglia filed an Amended Complaint seeking a share of Facebook, Inc.

On July 1, 2011, the Honorable Leslie G. Foschio entered an Order for expedited discovery requiring Mr.

Ceglia to “produce . . . the following electronic assets: (1) the native electronic version of the [Work for Hire Document] and all electronic copies of th[at] contract . . . ; (2) the original, native electronic files consisting of or containing the [Purported Emails] and all electronic copies of the [P]urported [E]mails; and (3) all computer and electronic media in [Mr. Ceglia’s] possession, custody, or control . . . .” (Order, Ceglia v. Zuckerberg, et al., No. 1:10-cv-00569-RJA, July 1, 2011, at p. 2).

The Court also issued an Electronic Asset Inspection Protocol (the “Protocol”) governing the analysis of the electronic assets produced by Mr. Ceglia. Pursuant to the Protocol, Stroz Friedberg, LLC (“Stroz Friedberg”) was to create “forensically-sound copies” of the electronic assets produced by Mr. Ceglia.

This report is a summary of Stroz Friedberg’s findings regarding the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document and the Purported Emails based on its analysis of the media produced by Mr. Ceglia pursuant to the Protocol and its analysis of the other data received as part of expedited discovery. This report is not intended to detail each and every aspect of Stroz Friedberg’s work in this engagement. Stroz Friedberg reserves the right to supplement or modify this report based on any new or additional information not previously examined, or brought to its attention or based on any new or additional allegations made by Mr. Ceglia.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 6 of 102 Executive Summary Stroz Friedberg found direct and compelling digital forensic evidence that the documents relied upon by Mr. Ceglia to support his claim are forged. Stroz Friedberg also found what it believes to be the authentic contract between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg. That contract contains no references to Facebook. As described more fully in this report, Stroz Friedberg made the following findings bearing on the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document and the Purported Emails: Stroz Friedberg did not find any exact copies of the Work for Hire Document on the hundreds of pieces of media produced by Mr. Ceglia, including three computers, three hard drives, 174 floppy disks, and 1,087 CDs (hereinafter, the “Ceglia Media”).

Stroz Friedberg did find a signed copy of an April 28, 2003 contract between Mr. Ceglia and Mr.

Zuckerberg, entitled “STREET FAX,” concerning Mr. Zuckerberg’s work on the StreetFax project (hereinafter, the “StreetFax Contract”). The StreetFax Contract differs substantially from the Work for Hire Document; the StreetFax Contract concerns only Mr. Zuckerberg’s work on the StreetFax project and includes no references to Facebook.

The StreetFax Contract was found as two image files, each file being a scanned copy of one page of the two-page contract. The image file of the second page of the StreetFax Contract was saved to a computer produced by Mr. Ceglia on March 3, 2004 at 10:35:21 a.m., and then sent out via email approximately two minutes later at 10:37:15 a.m. The image file of the first page of the StreetFax Contract was saved to a computer produced by Mr. Ceglia on March 3, 2004 at 10:38:35 a.m., and then sent out via email less than one minute later at 10:39:11 a.m. These images were attached to two emails from ceglia@adelphia.net to Jim Kole of Sidley Austin Brown & Wood LLP (“Sidley Austin”) (hereinafter, the “StreetFax Emails”). The first of the two emails reads: “Hi Jim, Hope all is well, I am at 727 490 5751 when your ready. Ill send page two next I should be here for the next hour. Paul.” The second of the two emails includes an attachment but has no text in the body of the email.

Sidley Austin also produced copies of the StreetFax Emails, which it has maintained since March 3, 2004. Stroz Friedberg determined that the content of the emails and the attached copy of the StreetFax Contract produced by Sidley Austin are the same as the content of the emails and the attached copy of the StreetFax Contract found on the Ceglia Media.

Stroz Friedberg identified seven unsigned electronic documents on the Ceglia Media that are variants of the Work for Hire Document. All of these electronic documents were backdated to appear as if they were created at earlier dates. They appear to be part of an effort to create a fraudulent contract.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 7 of 102 Stroz Friedberg did not find any of the Purported Emails in native file format, that is to say, as files in an email format. They do not exist in native format on any of the Ceglia Media or in any of Mr.

Stroz Friedberg did identify the Microsoft Word documents into which Mr. Ceglia claims to have copied-and-pasted the text of the Purported Emails. All of these Word documents were backdated to appear as if they were created at earlier dates.

The Purported Emails themselves, which Mr. Ceglia has proffered as authentic communications with Mr. Zuckerberg, are fabricated. Many of the Purported Emails reflect the wrong time zone.

For example, all of the Purported Emails purportedly sent from October 26, 2003 to April 4, 2004 contain the “-0400” time zone stamp that reflects Eastern Daylight Time. However, Eastern Daylight Time was not in effect during this time. There is no place in the Continental United States from which Mr. Ceglia could have sent these Purported Emails with an accurate “-0400” time zone stamp.

The Purported Emails have formatting differences in the email headers that are inconsistent with Mr. Ceglia’s explanation that he copied-and-pasted the emails into Word documents. These formatting inconsistencies include differences in the number of spaces following the colon in the “To” and “From” fields and the way in which the word “Tuesday” is abbreviated. These formatting differences indicate that the Purported Emails were typed or edited manually and were not solely the result of a copy-and-paste operation.

Stroz Friedberg found evidence that a hex editor was used on documents found on the Ceglia Media.

REDACTED Hex editors can be used to create electronic forgeries because they allow the manipulation of data at a level that makes traditional digital forensic analysis of the fraudulent change to the document more difficult, if not impossible, to detect.

Stroz Friedberg found substantial evidence of possible spoliation, including multiple reinstallations of the Windows operating system during the pendency of this litigation on the computer that contained the StreetFax Contract. Stroz Friedberg also found evidence that relevant files were deleted and overwritten in February 2011. In addition, Stroz Friedberg found evidence that email data was deleted from the recently disclosed getzuck@gmail.com account.

Stroz Friedberg identified substantial evidence of the existence of several pieces of media that Mr. Ceglia did not turn over, identify, or otherwise account for, some of which appear to have Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 8 of 102 contained versions of a contract between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg, namely: “Zuckerberg Contract page1.tif” and “Zuckerberg Contract page2.tif.” Three pieces of undisclosed media were used during the pendency of this litigation.

There is no digital forensic evidence on the Ceglia Media supporting a conclusion that the Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails are authentic documents dating from 2003 and 2004.

To the contrary, the digital forensic evidence strongly indicates that these documents were fabricated by Mr. Ceglia at a later date.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 9 of 102 Stroz Friedberg Background A. Company Information Founded in 2000, Stroz Friedberg is an international firm specializing in critical areas of digital risk management, including digital forensics, electronic discovery, data breach and cybercrime response, and business intelligence services and investigations. Stroz Friedberg’s management includes former federal and state prosecutors and former law enforcement officers with both government and private-sector experience in traditional and cyber-based investigations, digital forensics, data preservation and analysis, infrastructure protection, and electronic discovery. Many of its staff of digital forensic examiners, electronic security professionals, electronic discovery specialists, and private investigators joined Stroz Friedberg following careers in law enforcement, the intelligence community, and consulting.

B. Biographies This report was prepared by Bryan J. Rose, Michael F. McGowan, and Jason A. Novak, under the direction and supervision of Eric M. Friedberg.

Eric M. Friedberg This investigation was supervised and directed by Eric M. Friedberg. Mr. Friedberg is Co-President of Stroz Friedberg. He has participated in and supervised hundreds of digital forensic examinations over his eleven plus years with Stroz Friedberg, both in the context of litigation-related disputes and responses to cybercrime. He also has participated in and supervised many of the firm’s electronic forgery matters, including disputes over the authenticity of contracts, emails, movie scripts, and memoranda. In addition, Mr. Friedberg has published an article and lectured on electronic forgeries. Prior to joining Stroz Friedberg, Mr. Friedberg was an Assistant United States Attorney with the United States Attorney’s Office for the Eastern District of New York from 1989 to 2000, where he acted at various times as the Office’s Chief of Narcotics and the District’s lead cybercrime prosecutor. A copy of Mr. Friedberg’s C.V. is attached to this report as Exhibit A.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 10 of 102 Rose served as an Assistant United States Attorney in the Eastern District of New York and as an Assistant Attorney General in the State of Illinois. He also served as a law clerk for The Honorable Joel M. Flaum of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. Mr. Rose is a graduate of the University of Virginia School of Law, where he was named a Hardy Cross Dillard Scholar and served as Editor-in-Chief of the Virginia Law Review. A copy of Mr. Rose’s C.V. is attached to this report as Exhibit

Mr. Novak has provided sworn testimony in support of his analyses, as well as reports to domestic and international regulatory agencies. He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in Political Science with a minor in Computer Science from the University of Chicago and is an EnCase Certified Examiner. A copy of Mr.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 11 of 102 Evidence Considered Pursuant to the July 1, 2011 Order, Stroz Friedberg collected digital media made available by Mr. Ceglia through his agents between July 15, 2011 and July 22, 2011, in three different locations: Chicago, Illinois; Sarasota, Florida; and Buffalo, New York. Stroz Friedberg inspected the data on the following media for analysis according to the terms of the Court-ordered Protocol: A Compaq Presario SR5413WM desktop computer with a 250 gigabyte hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg imaged in Buffalo, New York, on July 15, 2011.

An eMachines ET1161-05 desktop computer with a 160 gigabyte hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg imaged in Buffalo, New York, on July 19, 2011.

A Toshiba Satellite L305-55968 laptop computer with a 320 gigabyte hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg imaged in Chicago, Illinois, on July 15, 2011.

A 200 gigabyte Maxtor Personal Storage 3200 external hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg imaged in Sarasota, Florida, on July 15, 2011. An external hard drive is a drive designed to be used and connected to a computer externally, without being physically inserted into the computer’s case.

A 120 gigabyte Seagate ST3120025A internal hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg imaged in Sarasota, Florida, on July 15, 2011 (hereinafter, the “Seagate Hard Drive”). This hard drive was produced as a standalone drive, without the computer in which it had once resided. An internal hard drive is a drive that is designed to be used within a computer, not as an external device.

A 500 gigabyte Western Digital internal hard drive, which Stroz Friedberg preserved in Chicago, Illinois, on July 18, 2011 . This hard drive also was produced as a standalone drive. Upon examination, Stroz Friedberg determined that this hard drive contained a series of E01 files, which is a forensic image file format, meaning that the data on this hard drive was a forensic image of another piece of digital media. Stroz Friedberg determined that this Western Digital hard drive contained a forensic copy of the Seagate Hard Drive, made on March 29, 2011 by an expert retained by Mr. Ceglia (hereinafter, the “Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert”).

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 12 of 102 One DVD, which was made available to Stroz Friedberg in Chicago, Illinois, between July 15, 2011 and July 22, 2011.

Using widely-accepted digital forensic techniques and procedures, digital forensic personnel from Stroz Friedberg made bit-for-bit, verified forensic copies or images of: the hard drive within the Compaq Presario desktop computer; the hard drive within the eMachines desktop computer; the hard drive within the Toshiba Satellite laptop computer; the Maxtor external hard drive; the Seagate Hard Drive; 173 of the 174 floppy disks; and 393 of the 1,087 CDs. The digital forensic copying process captured the entire contents of each piece of media, including the active user-accessible files, the deleted files, and the unallocated space, which may contain deleted content. Because the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert is a forensic image file, Stroz Friedberg used a forensically-sound copy method to copy the forensic image file on that drive to preservation media.

During the preservation process, Stroz Friedberg did not make copies of the following pieces of the Ceglia Media: One floppy disk, on which the data could not be accessed; 81 CDs that could not be imaged for technical reasons; 613 CDs that were not imaged because, after review, they did not appear to contain data relevant to the authenticity of Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails, which were the subject of the review authorized by the Court; and One DVD that could not be imaged for technical reasons.

Stroz Friedberg also received additional data pursuant to subpoenas or other Orders of the Court, including various sources of email data.

When Stroz Friedberg encountered technical obstacles copying a piece of media, it made efforts to acquire as much information as possible about the data. For four of the CDs that could not be imaged, Stroz Friedberg made file listings of their contents. For one of the CDs, a preservation of the logical active files was made. One of the CDs could not be read because an evidence number label from one of Mr. Ceglia’s experts had been placed on the back of the CD, making it unreadable. Another one of the CDs could not be imaged and a partial logical acquisition was made of its contents.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 13 of 102 Stroz Friedberg’s Process and Procedures Stroz Friedberg conducted its analysis of the Ceglia Media pursuant to the Protocol issued by the Court on July 1, 2011 (Doc. No. 85). Stroz Friedberg searched and analyzed the Ceglia Media “to identify only documents, data, fragments, and artifacts that reasonably appear[ed] to be related to the authenticity of the [Work for Hire Document] attached to the Amended Complaint and the [P]urported [E]mails described in the Amended Complaint.” (Protocol at p. 2). The documents, data, fragments, and artifacts found by Stroz Friedberg that reasonably appeared to be related to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails first were produced to Mr. Ceglia’s attorneys for a privilege review. The material was turned over to attorneys from Gibson Dunn only if no privilege objection was raised, an asserted privilege objection was withdrawn by Mr. Ceglia or his attorneys, or an assertion of privilege was overruled by the Court. Stroz Friedberg has followed the terms of the Protocol for all data found on the Ceglia Media and any other data subject to the Protocol during its analysis, including the procedures for privilege review and production set forth above and the maintenance of a search log.

In addition, Stroz Friedberg conducted an analysis of emails produced by Sidley Austin in response to a Court-authorized subpoena, as well as other materials produced pursuant to subpoenas or consent, including the contents of various webmail accounts belonging to Mr. Ceglia, or data produced by or collected from Mr. Ceglia’s agents or experts. This material was handled pursuant to the Protocol if applicable, or according to the terms of the applicable Court Order governing the production of the data.

During this analysis, Stroz Friedberg employed a methodology tailored to the particular facts of this case.

Stroz Friedberg’s methodology included: (1) conducting keyword and other searches of the digital forensic copies of the Ceglia Media and other data, including webmail accounts, to identify responsive documents or fragments of documents; (2) manually reviewing the documents containing keyword hits, certain unsearchable file types, such as image files with no text, and other documents to determine whether they were relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails; and (3) reviewing the digital forensic copies of the Ceglia Media for digital forensic artifacts relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails.

Stroz Friedberg’s methodology was designed to identify documents or forensic artifacts relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document and the Purported Emails. This methodology would have identified any and all copies or versions of the Work for Hire Document, any and all copies or versions of the StreetFax Contract, any and all copies of the Purported Emails, and other email correspondence between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 14 of 102 Work for Hire Document A. The Work for Hire Document Was Not Found on the Ceglia Media No exact copies of the Work for Hire Document were found on the Ceglia Media, which comprise hundreds of pieces of media, including computers, hard drives, floppy disks, and CDs. Stroz Friedberg used a methodology that would have identified any copies of the Work for Hire Document on the Ceglia Media if they had been present.

Stroz Friedberg did obtain a copy of the Work for Hire Document directly from Paul Argentieri, counsel for Mr. Ceglia, pursuant to a Court Order. This copy was attached to a June 27, 2010 email message from Mr. Ceglia to Mr. Argentieri. This means that Mr. Ceglia possessed the Work for Hire Document in electronic form on June 27, 2010, three days before the lawsuit was filed. Furthermore, in its analysis of Mr. Ceglia’s Gmail (paulceglia@gmail.com) account, Stroz Friedberg identifed a June 29, 2010 email from Mr. Ceglia to Karin Peterson, a former StreetFax employee, with a copy of the Work for Hire Document attached.

Stroz Friedberg would, therefore, have expected to find a copy of the Work for Hire Document - sent by Mr. Ceglia to Mr. Argentieri on June 27, 2010, and to Ms. Peterson on June 29, 2010 - somewhere on the Ceglia Media. Again, it did not.

Stroz Friedberg did identify a March 2011 document that contains various litigation documents, including a copy of the filed version of the Work for Hire Document and a full transcript of the July 20, 2010 oral arguments in this matter.

Unless otherwise specified, the dates and times referred to in this report are represented in Eastern Daylight or Standard Time.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 15 of 102 The StreetFax Contract (Ceglia Media) A. The StreetFax Contract Was Found on Two Different Ceglia Hard Drives As noted above, Stroz Friedberg searched for and did not find any exact copies of the Work for Hire Document on the Ceglia Media. However, Stroz Friedberg did find a copy of the StreetFax Contract on two hard drives produced by Mr. Ceglia: the Seagate Hard Drive and the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert, which is a forensic image of the Seagate Hard Drive.

Stroz Friedberg examined the Outlook Express email to determine if any of the Outlook Express email messages were relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document or the Purported Emails.

Among the Outlook Express email was a DBX file named “Sent Items.dbx,” which typically contains copies of emails sent from the email client. A DBX file is a standard email container file that stores multiple email messages and their attachments, similar to a Microsoft Outlook PST file or a Lotus Notes NSF file.

Upon examination, only two of the emails were determined to be relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document. A redacted screenshot of the relevant contents of the “Sent Items.dbx” file found on the Seagate Hard Drive and the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert is below.

The Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert was created on March 29, 2011 and subsequently preserved by Stroz Friedberg on July 18, 2011. The Seagate Hard Drive itself continued to be used after March 29, 2011 and was imaged by Stroz Friedberg on July 15, 2011.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 16 of 102 Fig. 1: Redacted Screenshot of “Sent Items.dbx” File The two emails contained in the “Sent Items.dbx” file that were determined to be relevant to the authenticity of the Work for Hire Document, shown in the screenshot above, had the following subject lines: “page 1 of 2 for Streetfax contract w mark” and “2 of 2 for streetfax contract.” The StreetFax Emails were sent from “ceglia@adelphia.net” to “jkole@sidley.com.” The first of the two emails reads: “Hi Jim, Hope all is well, I am at 727 490 5751 when your ready. Ill send page two next I should be here for the next hour. Paul.” The second of the two emails includes an attachment but has no text in the body of the email.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 17 of 102 Screenshots showing the StreetFax Emails are below: Fig. 2: Screenshot of the First StreetFax Email Fig. 3: Screenshot of the Second StreetFax Email Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 18 of 102 Both of the StreetFax Emails contain one-page attachments in Tagged Image File Format, commonly known as TIFF images. TIFF images are a standard image format in which the document itself is not a text-based document like a Word document, but rather is a “picture” that includes the document and text in a graphic format.

Upon examination, Stroz Friedberg determined that the two TIFF images attached to the StreetFax Emails were each one page of the two-page StreetFax Contract. The TIFF image attachments appear to be scanned documents and are of low-quality resolution. Copies of the StreetFax Emails and attached StreetFax Contract, as found on the Ceglia Media, are attached as Exhibits E, F, G, and H.

In examining the StreetFax Contract, Stroz Friedberg noted that it differed substantially from the Work for Hire Document relied on by Mr. Ceglia in this lawsuit. One obvious difference is that, unlike the Work for Hire Document, the StreetFax Contract relates only to Mr. Zuckerberg’s work on the StreetFax project and does not contain any references to Facebook.

Thus while Stroz Friedberg did not find any copies of the Work for Hire Document, it did uncover the StreetFax Contract relating exclusively to Mr. Zuckerberg’s work on the StreetFax project.

The StreetFax Contract appears to be oriented upside-down in TIFF images found on the Ceglia Media. In Exhibits F and H, we have rotated the pages of the StreetFax Contract so that they are oriented correctly.

Stroz Friedberg conducted the metadata analysis because information about the creation date and use of those files could bear on their authenticity. Computer operating systems use file systems to organize and store electronic files on digital media, and file systems generally store metadata about the individual files within the file system. This type of metadata is referred to as file system metadata. File system metadata typically includes the file’s physical location on the media, the location of the file within the directory structure of the file system, and timestamps, such as when the file was first created on the file system, when the file was last accessed, and when the file was last modified.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 19 of 102 The last accessed date of the “Sent Items.dbx” file is consistent with legitimate emails. While the last accessed file system timestamp can be updated by user or system actions, such as the opening of Microsoft Outlook Express or the automatic running of an antivirus scan, the metadata shows that the “Sent Items.dbx” file has not been accessed by a user or an automated process since June 22, 2008.

Since the StreetFax Emails were sent and received on March 3, 2004, Stroz Friedberg would expect the last accessed date of the “Sent Items.dbx” file to post-date that date, which is the case here.

The two scanned images - i.e., the attached pages of the StreetFax Contract - were created on a computer produced by Mr. Ceglia shortly before the two emails were sent.

Stroz Friedberg found evidence of a deleted file named “Scan0002.tif,” which was created on March 3, 2004 at 10:35:21 a.m. Although the file was deleted, Stroz Friedberg was able to partially recover and view its contents using digital forensic techniques. The recoverable portion of this file appeared to match the second page of the StreetFax Contract. Stroz Friedberg also compared the file sizes and determined that the deleted file was exactly the same size as the copy of “Scan0002.tif” that was emailed to Mr. Kole.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 20 of 102 Stroz Friedberg also found evidence of a deleted file named “Scan0001.tif,” which was created on March 3, 2004 at 10:38:35 a.m. The contents of this file could not be recovered. However, Stroz Friedberg compared the file sizes and determined that it was exactly the same size as the copy of “Scan0001.tif” that was emailed to Mr. Kole.

Thus, the digital forensic evidence reflects the following chronology of events. On the morning of March 3, 2004 at 10:35:21 a.m., a scanned copy of the second page of the StreetFax Contract was saved to the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive. Approximately two minutes later, at 10:37:15 a.m., this file was sent as an attachment to the first StreetFax Email that Mr. Ceglia sent to Mr. Kole. Shortly thereafter, a scanned copy of the first page of the StreetFax Contract was saved onto the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive at 10:38:35 a.m., and emailed to Mr. Kole less than a minute later at 10:39:11 a.m.

The contemporaneous creation of files with the same names and sizes as the StreetFax Contract on the Seagate Hard Drive corroborates that the pages of the StreetFax Contract were scanned to that hard drive on the morning of March 3, 2004 and sent to Mr. Kole using the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive shortly thereafter.

Ceglia. Attached to this email are photographs of paper documents. One of the photographs is of a printout of an email chain sent on March 4-5, 2004, involving Mr. Ceglia, Mr. Kole, and Karin Petersen, a former StreetFax employee. The printout appears to have been printed by Mr. Kole, as the top of the document, where Microsoft Outlook identifies the name of the user whose account was used to print the email, reads “Kole, James D.” Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 21 of 102 Fig. 4: Photograph of Printed March 4-5, 2004 Email Chain Mr. Kole’s printout of the email chain contains a handwritten note in the upper-right margin. The handwritten note reads as follows: “I think I’ll just make a veiled reference to payments that could be made if he settles the matter as a businessman rather than a cyber-briber. PLEASE, PLEASE fax me the contract as I can’t read the one sent earlier to understand his or your breach [crossed-out text] argume[cutoff text].” This document is significant because it is evidence that Mr. Kole earlier had received a copy of the contract between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg that was difficult to read. As noted above, the copy of the StreetFax Contract attached to the March 3, 2004 emails to Mr. Kole is a low-quality scanned image.

Thus, the handwritten note on the printout of the March 4-5, 2004 email chain corroborates the authenticity of the StreetFax Emails.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 22 of 102 VIII. The StreetFax Contract (Sidley Austin) A. Sidley Austin Produced Copies of the StreetFax Emails and the Attached StreetFax Contract Stroz Friedberg also was provided copies of the StreetFax Emails from Sidley Austin, the law firm for which Stroz Friedberg understands Mr. Kole worked when Mr. Ceglia sent him the StreetFax Emails. The StreetFax Emails were sent to Sidley Austin’s domain, sidley.com. Stroz Friedberg further understands that these copies of the StreetFax Emails were produced by Sidley Austin pursuant to a subpoena authorized by the Court.

B. The StreetFax Emails Are Identical to the Ceglia Copies Stroz Friedberg conducted a visual comparison of the copies of the StreetFax Emails on the Ceglia Media and the StreetFax Emails produced by Sidley Austin. Stroz Friedberg determined that the two copies appeared to be identical.

Stroz Friedberg then conducted an analysis of the sender, recipient, sent on, and subject metadata, as well as the content and attachments, of the two sets of StreetFax Emails. Stroz Friedberg determined that the metadata, the content, and the attachments of the two sets of StreetFax Emails matched. This was expected, given that the copies constitute two halves of an email correspondence - the sender’s side and the recipient’s side.

In addition, Stroz Friedberg conducted an automated comparison of the attached pages of the StreetFax Contract produced by Sidley Austin and the attached pages of the StreetFax Contract found on the Ceglia Media. This comparison was done by generating hash values for the TIFF image files. A hash value is a digital fingerprint of a file generated by running the contents of a file or other electronic data set through a cryptographic algorithm to produce a string of alphanumeric characters. If two electronic files differ even by a single bit, they would have different hash values.

Stroz Friedberg confirmed that the attached pages of the StreetFax Contract produced by Sidley Austin and the attached pages of the StreetFax Contract found on the Ceglia Media have matching hash values and that they are identical. Again, this was expected, since these come from the two sides of the same email correspondence.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 23 of 102 C. The Internet Headers of the StreetFax Emails Confirm That They Were Routed Through Sidley Austin’s and Adelphia’s Servers on March 3, The Internet headers of the StreetFax Emails confirm that those emails were sent and received on March 3, 2004 through servers used by Adelphia and Sidley Austin.

When an email message is transmitted across the Internet from the sender to a recipient, each server that is used in the transmission affixes to the header information of the email the date and time when the email message was received by the server. This information can be used to reconstruct an email message’s path through the Internet, as it shows both what servers were used to transmit the email along its path from sender to recipient and the date and time of the transmission.

The Internet header related to the email’s transmission is affixed to the email message by the servers through which the email passes, not the computer used to send or receive the email. This means that the Internet header information related to the transmission of the StreetFax Emails was affixed by servers controlled by Adelphia and Sidley Austin and is not dependent on the date and time settings of the computers used by Mr. Ceglia or Mr. Kole. The Internet header thus provides additional information to establish the authenticity of the StreetFax Emails.

The earlier of the two StreetFax Emails was sent at 10:37 a.m. Eastern Standard Time and had the subject “page 1 of 2 for Streetfax contract w mark.” The Internet header of that email confirms the following: The email was sent from a computer with the IP address 24.53.222.222 to a server at adelphia.net and received by that server at 10:37:10 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on March 3, 2004. Records obtained from Adelphia demonstrate that the adelphia.net account used to send the StreetFax Emails was registered to Carmine Ceglia. In his October 24, 2011 declaration, Mr.

Ceglia identified this account as belonging to his parents (Ceglia October 24, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 180, at ¶ 8(b)).

The email then was sent from the Adelphia server to a server at sidley.com and received by that sidley.com server at 9:38:01 a.m. Central Standard Time on March 3, 2004. The sidley.com server is used by Sidley Austin, the law firm where Stroz Friedberg has been informed that Mr.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 24 of 102 The email then was routed internally from one Sidley Austin server (mail02) to another (chexchange04) and received by the Sidley Austin server chexchange04 at 9:38:08 a.m. Central Standard Time on March 3, 2004.

The Internet header related to the transmission of the 10:37 a.m. StreetFax Email produced by Sidley Austin appears below: Received: from mail02.sidley.com (MAIL02 [10.16.4.97]) by chexchange04.sidley.com with SMTP (Microsoft Exchange Internet Mail Service Version 5.5.2654.52) id FNLSNFD1; Wed, 3 Mar 2004 09:38:08 -0600 Received: from 68.168.78.199 by mail02.sidley.com with SMTP (Tumbleweed MMS SMTP Relay); Wed, 03 Mar 2004 09:38:01 -0500 Received: from youro0kwkw9jwc ([24.53.222.222]) by mta9.adelphia.net ( InterMail vM.5.01.06.05 201-253-122-130-105-20030824) with SMTP id <20040303153710.ELGV26462.mta9.adelphia.net@youro0kwkw9jwc> for <jkole@sidley.com>; Wed, 3 Mar 2004 10:37:10 -0500 Fig. 5: Internet Header of 10:37 a.m. StreetFax Email Produced by Sidley Austin The second of the two StreetFax Emails was sent at 10:39 a.m. Eastern Standard Time and had the Subject “2 of 2 for streetfax contract.” The Internet header of that email confirms the following: The email was sent from a computer with the IP address 24.53.222.222 to a server at adelphia.net and received by that server at 10:39:06 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on March 3,

The email then was sent from the Adelphia server to a server at sidley.com and received by that sidley.com server at 9:41:30 a.m. Central Standard Time on March 3, 2004.

Due to the time it takes for an email to traverse the Internet from one server to another, it is common for there to be small differences between the time an email is sent by one server and the time it is received by another.

The Sidley Austin server named mail02.sidley appears to be set to the Central time zone, as the time it appended to this Internet header (9:38:01 a.m.) is approximately one hour earlier than the time appended by the Adelphia server (10:37:10 p.m.), which resided in the Eastern time zone. However, the offset indicates that the time zone is set to Eastern time. The server time and time zone are separate fields that can be set independently. Thus, the likely explanation is that while the server time was correctly set and reflects the actual time in the Central time zone, the time zone setting was incorrectly set to Eastern time.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 25 of 102 The email then was routed internally from one Sidley Austin server (mail01) to another (chexchange03) and received by the Sidley Austin server chexchange03 at 9:43:01 a.m. Central Standard Time on March 3, 2004.

The Internet header related to the transmission of the 10:39 a.m. StreetFax Email produced by Sidley Austin appears below: Received: from mail01.sidley.com ([10.16.4.89]) by chexchange03.sidley.com with SMTP (Microsoft Exchange Internet Mail Service Version 5.5.2653.13) id FNL7R89V; Wed, 3 Mar 2004 09:43:01 -0600 Received: from 68.168.78.199 by mail01.sidley.com with SMTP (Tumbleweed MMS SMTP Relay); Wed, 03 Mar 2004 09:41:30 -0500 Received: from youro0kwkw9jwc ([24.53.222.222]) by mta9.adelphia.net ( InterMail vM.5.01.06.05 201-253-122-130-105-20030824) with SMTP id <20040303153906.EMRF26462.mta9.adelphia.net@youro0kwkw9jwc> for <jkole@sidley.com>; Wed, 3 Mar 2004 10:39:06 -0500 Fig. 6: Internet Header of 10:39 a.m. StreetFax Email Produced by Sidley Austin The Internet header information for the StreetFax Emails establishes that the email messages from Mr.

Ceglia to Mr. Kole were sent and received on the morning of March 3, 2004, which is the same as the sent and received date shown on the faces of the StreetFax Emails. In addition, this evidence confirms that the servers used in the transmission were associated with Adelphia, the service provider for the email account used by the sender, and Sidley Austin, the employer of the recipient, of the StreetFax Emails.

In addition to containing the dates and times at which the emails were transmitted from Adelphia’s servers to Sidley Austin’s servers, the Internet headers of the emails also contain detailed information about the servers used in the transmission of the messages, including the name and version of the software used by the servers. For example, the Internet headers above show that the Sidley Austin servers chexchange04.sidley.com and chexchange03.sidley.com are running Microsoft Exchange Internet Mail Service (“Microsoft Exchange”), versions 5.5.2654.52 and 5.5.2653.13 respectively. Microsoft Exchange version 5.5 was released in November 1997, and version 5.5.2653 was released in November 2000.

Furthermore, the message IDs for the StreetFax Emails, which are <20040303153710.ELGV26462.mta9.adelphia.net@youro0kwkw9jwc> for the 10:37 a.m. email and <20040303153906.EMRF26462.mta9.adelphia.net@youro0kwkw9jwc> for the 10:39 a.m. email, are The server mail01.sidley also appears to have an incorrect time zone setting.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 26 of 102 distinct and appear to contain timestamps that are consistent with the times that the emails were sent.

These details are important corroborating evidence of the authenticity of the emails, as the names and versions of the software being run are consistent with the software and versions that could have been running on Sidley Austin’s servers in March 2004.

D. The Metadata of the PST File in Which the StreetFax Emails Were Located Supports the Authenticity of the Emails Sidley Austin produced the StreetFax Emails within a PST file, which is a Microsoft Outlook container file used to store multiple Microsoft Outlook items such as messages, calendar items, and contacts. A PST file contains metadata about the messages stored within it, as well as the metadata contained within the messages themselves.

Specifically, the PST file shows that the StreetFax Emails were forwarded on March 3, 2004 between 10:47 a.m. and 10:48 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, approximately 10 minutes after Mr. Kole received these emails. No information was provided regarding the indentity of the person or persons to whom Mr.

Kole forwarded those emails. This means that Mr. Kole had to have received the StreetFax Emails prior to March 3, 2004 at 10:47 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, as he could not have forwarded them prior to receiving them.

In addition, the file system metadata of the PST shows that it was created on January 27, 2006 and last modified on February 20, 2007.

As such, the StreetFax Emails existed in the PST no later than February 20, 2007. Since the StreetFax Emails were sent and received on March 3, 2004, Stroz Friedberg would expect the last modified date of the PST file at Sidley Austin file to post-date that date, which is the case here.

The timestamps in the message IDs appear to be listed in Coordinated Universal Time, which is five hours ahead of Eastern Standard Time. For example, 10:37 a.m. Eastern Standard Time would correspond with 3:37 p.m.

PST files can be created by users to manage email in a variety of ways, including (1) to store related emails (e.g., all emails related to StreetFax); or (2) to reduce the size of an online mailbox in response to size limitations or for other reasons. Thus, it is common to see a PST file whose creation date post-dates the sent or received date of some or all of the emails it contains.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 27 of 102 The Purported Emails (Ceglia Media) Mr. Ceglia’s Amended Complaint purports to quote from or otherwise reference 22 Purported Emails between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg. During the litigation, Mr. Ceglia acknowledged that he did not keep the Purported Emails referenced in the Amended Complaint in their original native form, that is to say, as individual files in message format. Rather, he claimed to have copied-and-pasted the text of the Purported Emails into Microsoft Word documents saved to floppy disks in order to maintain copies of these messages, as he claimed he did not know of any other way to preserve emails. (Ceglia June 12, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 65, at ¶ 11). Mr. Ceglia also claimed to have performed this copy-and-paste process in 2003 and 2004, “[d]uring and just after [he] discontinued regular email communication with Mr.

During its analysis of the Ceglia Media, Stroz Friedberg searched for the Purported Emails quoted or otherwise referenced in the Amended Complaint and identified the emails as existing only in three Word documents, which are attached to this report as Exhibits I, J, and K. The Purported Emails in these Word documents had content that resembled the text quoted in the Amended Complaint. Stroz Friedberg did not identify any copies of the Purported Emails in email format files.

Specifically, Stroz Friedberg identified three files containing the text of 27 purported emails: (1) “Mark emails july04.doc,” containing three purported emails between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Ceglia, dated between April 6, 2004 and July 22, 2004; (2) “Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc,” containing nine purported emails between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Ceglia, dated between July 30, 2003 and November 30, 2003; and (3) “mark feb emails.doc,” containing fifteen purported emails between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Ceglia, dated between January 1, 2004 and February 7, 2004. These three files were produced on two media: (1) a floppy disk produced in Chicago, Illinois; and (2) a CD produced in Sarasota, Florida.

Mr. Ceglia claims to have copied-and-pasted the text of the 27 purported emails to Word documents that were then saved to a floppy disk in 2003 and 2004, when the purported emails supposedly were sent and received. Specifically, in Mr. Ceglia’s November 17, 2011 declaration, he stated that he “saved those files to floppy disks.” (Ceglia November 17, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 225, at ¶ 8). This floppy disk appears to be one of the floppy disks copied by John Evans, one of Mr. Ceglia’s retained experts, and subsequently analyzed by another of Mr. Ceglia’s forensic experts, Jerry Grant. In his November 16, The files are not exact duplicates and do not have the same hash values on each media. However, it appears from a manual inspection that the content of each document on each media is the same.

In his June 17, 2011 declaration, Mr. Evans stated, “[o]ne of the floppy disks in PLA’s custody, as collected and imaged from Mr. Ceglia, contains three Microsoft Word documents containing what I understand to be email communications between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Zuckerberg relating to the issues in this case.” (Evans June 17, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 61, at ¶ 8).

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 28 of 102 2011 declaration, Mr. Grant states that he “received 41 floppy disks for review” and “determined that the first 2 were relevant to this matter.” (Grant November 16, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 226, at ¶¶ 9, 10).

Stroz Friedberg found substantial evidence that all three of the Word documents containing the purported emails are backdated. The effect of backdating is to obscure the true date and time at which computer activity, such as the creation or modification of documents, occurred. Backdating can be accomplished by setting the system clock on a computer hard drive to an earlier date, such that activity that occurs on the hard drive while the computer is in a backdated state will appear to have occurred at that earlier time.

In addition, the text of the Purported Emails themselves demonstrates that they are fabricated.

A. All Three Word Documents Containing the Text of the Purported Emails Are Backdated Mr. Ceglia produced three unique Microsoft Word documents - “Mark emails july04.doc,” “Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc,” and “mark feb emails.doc” - containing the text of 27 purported emails, all of which were backdated.

Stroz Friedberg found five entries related to this file on a floppy disk produced in Chicago, Illinois, one of which relates to an active file and the remaining four of which relate to deleted versions of the file. The active file purports to have been created, last modified, and last accessed on July 23, 2004. However, two of the records related to deleted copies have file created timestamps from an earlier date, October 21, 2003, as follows: File Name State File Created Last Written Last Accessed Mark emails july04.doc Active 07/23/2004 09:46:51 AM 07/23/2004 06:24:28 PM 7/23/2004 Mark emails july04.doc Deleted 10/21/2003 11:52:59 AM 10/21/2003 11:53:00 AM 10/21/2003 Mark emails july04.doc Deleted 10/21/2003 11:53:49 AM 07/23/2004 10:18:50 AM 10/21/2003 No time values are available for this metadata field as the FAT file system on the floppy disk does not maintain that information.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 29 of 102 This metadata anomaly constitutes evidence of backdating because a file that was last modified in October 2003 could not contain authentic emails from July 2004. It also is highly unlikely that this file would be named “Mark emails july04.doc” if it actually had been created and last modified in October 2003. This metadata anomaly likely resulted from at least one copy of the file named “Mark emails july04.doc” having been saved using a computer with a system clock backdated to October 21, 2003.

Moreover, the existence of multiple copies of this and other files is significant in and of itself. It is Stroz Friedberg’s experience that in the process of creating a forged electronic document, the forger frequently creates and deletes multiple versions of the document being forged. These versions often evidence metadata anomalies and reflect iterative attempts to backdate or forge the documents.

The active file purports to have been created, last modified, and last accessed on July 23, 2004.

However, two of the records related to deleted copies indicate that the file was created, last modified, and last accessed on the earlier date of October 21, 2003, as follows: File Name State File Created Last Written Last Accessed Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc Active 07/23/2004 09:47:01 AM 07/23/2004 06:15:54 PM 7/23/2004 Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc Deleted 10/21/2003 11:54:12 AM 10/21/2003 11:54:14 AM 10/21/2003 Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc Deleted 10/21/2003 11:54:49 AM 10/21/2003 11:54:50 AM 10/21/2003 Again, a document that was last modified in October 2003 could not contain authentic emails from December 2003. It also is highly unlikely that this file would be named “Mark harvard emails up to Dec.doc” if it actually had been created and last modified in October 2003. This discrepancy likely resulted from the files having been saved with a computer whose system clock had been backdated to October 21, 2003, which is the same date as the deleted version of “Mark emails july04.doc” was saved.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 30 of 102 3. The Word Document “mark feb emails.doc” Has Been Backdated The Word document “mark feb emails.doc” contains the text of fifteen purported emails that supposedly were sent and received between January 1, 2004 and February 7, 2004. Mr. Ceglia produced this Word document on a floppy disk in Chicago, Illinois. The file “mark feb emails.doc” has a purported creation date of July 23, 2004. However, when Stroz Friedberg reviewed records of deleted files on the floppy disk, it discovered a metadata anomaly.

Specifically, the floppy disk contains a record of a deleted version of the file “mark emails 082903.doc.” That deleted file has a last accessed date of February 18, 2011, which indicates that the file was deleted on or after that date. The metadata of the files on the floppy disk shows that no files were added to or modified on the floppy disk since July 23, 2004. This fact, and the fact that a copy of “mark emails 082903.doc” was deleted on or after February 18, 2011, are not consistent with the amount of disk space available on the floppy disk.

The deleted version of “mark emails 082903.doc” was 17,128 bytes in size. Therefore, there should be at least 17,128 bytes of free space available on the floppy disk, since no files have been added to the disk or modified after February 18, 2011, the date the file was deleted. In fact, according to the metadata, no files have been added to, or modified on, the floppy disk since July 23, 2004. However, the floppy disk is almost full and only has 2,048 bytes of free space available. Thus, the actual amount of available disk space reflects usage that is inconsistent with the dates and times in its metadata. This anomaly demonstrates that data was added to the floppy disk on or after February 18, 2011 and that the dates and times of files on this floppy disk are not accurate and have been backdated.

Moreover, the deleted file “mark emails 082903.doc” sat in the same location on the floppy disk where the active file “mark feb emails.doc” now sits. Since data can only be written to available disk space, the file “mark feb emails.doc” could not have been saved to the floppy disk until the file that previously resided in the location where it was saved - “mark emails 082903.doc” - had been deleted. The file “mark emails 082903.doc” was not deleted until on or after February 18, 2011, meaning that the file “mark feb emails.doc” was added to the floppy disk after that date. Consequently, the purported July 23, 2004 creation date for that file is incorrect and provides further evidence of backdating.

Thus, the file “mark feb emails.doc” likely was created on the floppy disk sometime on or after February 18, 2011, using a computer whose system clock was backdated to July 23, 2004.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 31 of 102 B. The Purported Emails Contain the Wrong Time Zone Stamps In addition to the backdated Microsoft Word documents containing the Purported Emails, the text of the Purported Emails themselves constitutes substantial evidence that they are fabricated.

Each of the purported emails contains a “Date” line that contains the date and time the email was purportedly sent, a line that is normally automatically added to an email by the computer’s system clock.

At the end of each “Date” line, the time zone that the email was purportedly sent in is indicated with an offset of the format “+HHMM” or “-HHMM.” HHMM indicates hours and minutes from Coordinated Universal Time (“UTC”); the + or - indicates whether the time zone is before or after Coordinated Universal Time. For example, Eastern Daylight Time is represented as “-0400” and Eastern Standard Time is represented as “-0500.” Standard time was in effect in the United States from late October 2003 to early April 2004. Thus, one would expect that authentic emails sent during that time period from a location in the Eastern Time Zone would contain the “-0500” stamp, in the absence of an inaccurate system clock. However, all but one of the 27 purported emails contain the “-0400” time zone stamp for Eastern Daylight Time, including all of the purported emails supposedly sent between October 26, 2003 and April 4, 2004. There is no place in the Continental United States from which an email could have been sent with the “-0400” time zone stamp during this time period using a computer with an accurate and properly set system clock.

Below is an example of a purported email chain between Mr. Zuckerberg and Mr. Ceglia. This email chain purportedly occurred on February 4, 2004, when standard time and not daylight saving time was in effect. If these emails were authentic and, in fact, had been sent on February 4, 2004 during standard time, they would have the “-0500” time zone stamp reflecting Eastern Standard Time. However, these purported emails display the “-0400” time zone stamp reflecting Eastern Daylight Time, which, again, was not in effect on February 4, 2004.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 32 of 102 Fig. 7: Screenshot of Purported Emails with -0400 Time Zone Stamp Put simply, Mr. Ceglia’s purported emails dated between October 26, 2003 and April 4, 2004 display the time zone stamp reflecting Eastern Daylight Time. This would not be possible if the purported emails were authentic, as Eastern Standard Time was in effect at that time.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 33 of 102 C. The Purported Emails Are Inconsistently Formatted The header information in the purported emails also is inconsistently formatted, which is significant because this information is automatically generated when an email is created, not typed by the user. As such, if the purported emails were authentic, the formatting of the headers should be consistent, since the purported emails were allegedly copied-and-pasted from the same source. The inconsistent formatting indicates that the purported emails were not copied-and-pasted from Mr. Ceglia’s webmail, as he has asserted. (Ceglia November 17, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 225, at ¶ 7).

For example, the majority of the purported emails in the Word document “mark feb emails.doc” indicate the sender in the header information with a line starting “From: ”, with a single space following the colon.

This can be seen in the screenshot below, which is a copy of the header information from one of the Purported Emails with the formatting marks revealed: Fig. 8: Screenshot of Purported Email with One Space After “From:” However, three emails in that same Word document indicate their sender with a line starting “From: ”, with two spaces after the colon. An example of this can be seen in the screenshot below, which is a copy of the email header information from another one of the Purported Emails with the formatting marks revealed: Fig. 9: Screenshot of Purported Email with Two Spaces After “From:” A similar inconsistency appears in the purported emails in regard to the number of spaces after the colon in the “To” field. Various purported emails show one, two, or three spaces after the colon in the “To” field.

For instance, in the two screenshots shown above in Figures 8 and 9, there is one space following the Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 34 of 102 colon in the “To” field. However, in the two purported emails shown below, shown with their header information and formatting remarks revealed, there are two or three spaces following the colon in the “To” field: Fig. 10: Screenshot of Purported Email with Two Spaces After “To:” Fig. 11: Screenshot of Purported Email with Three Spaces After “To:” If the purported emails were actually copied-and-pasted from one authentic source, such as Mr. Ceglia’s MSN account, these inconsistencies in spacing in the “From” and “To” fields would not exist.

Similarly, the word “Tuesday” is inconsistently abbreviated in the automatically-generated headers of the purported emails. In some of the purported emails, the word is abbreviated “Tue”. This can be seen in the screenshot below, which is a copy of the header information from one of the Purported Emails with the formatting marks revealed: Fig. 12: Screenshot of Purported Email with the Abbreviation “Tue” Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 35 of 102 However, in other purported emails, the word Tuesday is abbreviated “Tues”. This can be seen in the screenshot below, which is a copy of the header information from another one of the Purported Emails with the formatting marks revealed: Fig. 13: Screenshot of Purported Email with the Abbreviation “Tues” This internal inconsistency between “Tue” and “Tues” should not exist if the purported emails actually were copied-and-pasted from one authentic source.

Moreover, the “Tues” abbreviation for Tuesday, which appears in the email excerpted in figure 13 above, is inconsistent with the way that MSN actually abbreviates Tuesday. MSN abbreviates “Tuesday” as “Tue”. Therefore, the abbreviation “Tues” should not appear in any emails copied-and-pasted from MSN.

In addition, these screenshots show one other significant and revealing formatting discrepancy. Figure 9 has a paragraph symbol immediately following the time zone indicator (-0400), which would be expected if the purported emails were actually copied-and-pasted from one authentic source. However, Figure 13 shows one space before the paragraph symbol, while Figures 8, 10, and 12 show two spaces before the paragraph symbol. Moreover, Figure 11 has a long series of spaces to the end of the line. These additional spaces before the paragraph symbol are anomalous; moreover, the number of spaces should be consistent among authentic emails copied-and-pasted from one authentic source. This discrepancy is further evidence that these purported emails were either manually typed or edited and were not solely the result of a copy-and-paste operation.

Finally, all four screenshots have an extra space between the end of Mr. Zuckerberg’s email address (mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu) and the closing angle bracket (“>”). If these purported emails actually were copied-and-pasted, there should not be such a space. Thus, the extra space is additional evidence that the purported emails were not the result of a copy-and-paste operation.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 36 of 102 The Purported Emails (Webmail Accounts) Pursuant to the Court’s Orders, subpoenas, and/or Mr. Ceglia’s consent, Stroz Friedberg acquired the following webmail accounts for Mr. Ceglia: (1) paulceglia@msn.com; and (2) paulceglia@gmail.com.

In addition, the contents of the following webmail accounts were produced to Stroz Friedberg pursuant to Court Orders, subpoenas, and/or Mr. Ceglia’s consent: (1) paulceglia@msn.com; (2) paulceglia@gmail.com; (3) getzuck@gmail.com; (4) alleganypellets@gmail.com; and (5) landlubber39@yahoo.com.

Stroz Friedberg searched these webmail accounts for copies of the purported emails quoted or otherwise referenced in the Amended Complaint. Stroz Friedberg did not identify any of these messages in native format.

Mr. Ceglia has also been ordered to consent to the acquisition and inspection of the webmail account, paulc@hush.com, the contents of which Stroz Friedberg expects to receive.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 37 of 102 Seven Backdated Versions of the Work for Hire Document During its analysis of the Ceglia Media, Stroz Friedberg searched for, and did not identify, any exact electronic copies of the Work for Hire Document attached to the Amended Complaint. The absence of an electronic copy is notable because, as described above, Mr. Ceglia claimed in Court to have printed the contract. In addition, Mr. Ceglia emailed the Work for Hire Document on two occasions in the days before filing this lawsuit: once on June 27, 2010 to Paul Argentieri, and once on June 29, 2010 using his Gmail (paulceglia@gmail.com) account to Karin Peterson. Thus, the Work for Hire Document existed in electronic form at some point close in time to the filing of this litigation, and Stroz Friedberg would have expected to find it on one of the electronic assets that Mr. Ceglia was ordered to produce for inspection.

Instead of the Work for Hire Document attached to the Amended Complaint, Stroz Friedberg found on the Ceglia Media seven unsigned versions of the Work for Hire Document that are very similar but not identical to the Work for Hire Document. All seven of those electronic documents contain metadata anomalies indicative of backdating and document manipulation.

A. All Seven Versions of the Work For Hire Document Are Backdated All seven versions of the Work for Hire Document found on the Ceglia Media show metadata anomalies indicative of backdating, which is an act of manipulating the system clock to make documents appear to have been created at an earlier time.

As noted previously, the file system metadata indicates, among other things, the dates on which a file was last written to and last accessed. The last written timestamp shows the last time that a user modified, or made a change to, the document. The last accessed timestamp reflects the last time the file was opened, whether any changes were made to the document or not.

It is possible to open a file and update the last accessed date without updating the last written date.

However, because a user must open a document to modify it, it is not possible to make changes to a Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 38 of 102 document and update the last written timestamp, without also updating the last accessed timestamp. For this reason, a file’s last written timestamp should not post-date its last accessed timestamp.

The document “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” has the following metadata: File Name File Created Last Written SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc 05/02/2003 11:24:26 AM 04/24/2003 03:06:22 PM Last Accessed 4/22/2003 The fact that the document’s last written date (April 24, 2003) is later than its last accessed date (April 22, 2003) indicates that backdating has occurred. Specifically, the document named “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” was last accessed on a computer whose system clock had been backdated to April 22, 2003, the date reflected in the last accessed timestamp.

This evidence of system clock manipulation is not the only evidence of backdating related to the document “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc.” The location of that file also is significant: “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” is an active file that sits on top of and overwrote two deleted files on a floppy disk. This means that the two deleted files are no longer present on the floppy disk because a new file - “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” - was created on the floppy disk in the same disk space, or physical location, previously occupied by the two deleted files.

When a file is written to a floppy disk, it cannot be written to disk space that currently is occupied by an active file. Instead, the file can only be written to available disk space. Disk space is considered available if it is empty or if the file currently residing in that space has been deleted. If an active file sits on top of and has overwritten a deleted file, the deleted file had to have been deleted before the active file was created on or copied to that disk space. As such, the two overwritten files had to have been deleted prior to the time that the “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” document was created on the floppy disk.

The metadata associated with the “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” and the two deleted files it overwrote is as follows: File Name State File Created Last Written Last Accessed SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc Active 05/02/2003 11:24:26 AM 04/24/2003 03:06:22 PM 4/22/2003 Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc Deleted 04/25/2003 04:15:35 PM 04/25/2003 07:38:06 PM 2/18/2011 Work for hire SF template.doc Deleted 04/25/2003 11:49:06 AM 04/25/2003 01:38:10 PM 2/18/2011 It is possible for systems to be configured so that updates to last accessed timestamps are disabled. However, the close proximity between the last written and last accessed dates of files on floppy disks produced by Mr. Ceglia indicates that this condition does not apply for the documents discussed here.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 39 of 102 When a file is deleted, the last accessed date timestamp is generally updated to the time of the deletion.

This means that the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” and “Work for hire SF template.doc” files were deleted on or after February 18, 2011. However, based on its creation date, the “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” document was created on the floppy disk years earlier, on May 2, 2003.

This active file, purportedly from 2003, cannot sit atop two files deleted in February 2011, absent some sort of system clock manipulation or other fabrication of the files.

Based on all of this metadata evidence, Stroz Friedberg concluded that the “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” file was copied to this floppy disk on or after February 18, 2011, using a computer whose system clock was backdated to May 2, 2003, and then subsequently accessed on a computer whose system clock was backdated to April 22, 2003.

B. The Six Other Versions of the Work For Hire Document Are Backdated Stroz Friedberg identified six other modified versions of the Work for Hire Document on a CD produced by Mr. Ceglia in Sarasota, Florida. All of these documents display a similar metadata anomaly to the one described above: the last printed dates are later than their last modified dates, which is impossible absent system clock backdating: File Name Last Modified Last Printed work for hire SF template.doc 04/25/2003 07:47:58 AM 2/15/2011 Copy1_work for hire SF template.doc 04/25/2003 07:50:52 AM 2/15/2011 Copy1_XWRL0003.TMP 04/25/2003 07:50:52 AM 2/15/2011 Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc 04/25/2003 12:16:12 PM 2/15/2011 XWRL0004.TMP 04/25/2003 12:16:12 PM 2/15/2011 Copy1_Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc 04/25/2003 03:38:06 PM 2/15/2011 When a Microsoft Word document is printed, the embedded last printed date and time is updated to the current time. However, this updated embedded last printed date and time is only maintained in the file if the file is saved, which is an act that necessarily updates the last modified date and time as well. Absent system clock manipulation, the last printed date of a document cannot be later than the last modified date.

This metadata shows that these versions of the Work for Hire Document were printed on or after February 15, 2011, during the pendency of this litigation. In addition, at some point after February 15, 2011, again during the pendency of this litigation, the documents were accessed and saved on a computer whose Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 40 of 102 system clock was backdated to April 25, 2003, a date just prior to the supposed date of the contract on which Mr. Ceglia is suing. The backdated documents were then produced to Defendants.

C. All Seven Versions of the Work For Hire Document Have Significant Formatting Differences Between Page 1 And Page 2 All seven electronic documents are similar to the Work for Hire Document in that they contain significant formatting differences between Page 1 and Page 2. Specifically, all seven versions of the Work for Hire Document contain margins and formatting on Page 1 that has been manipulated through the manual reduction of white space. Thus, more text characters can fit on Page 1 of these documents.

This formatting is evident in an examination of the margin settings of the documents in Microsoft Word.

For example, while the margin between the columns on Page 2 of the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file is set to 0.32 inches, the margin between the columns on the Page 1 of that file is set much more narrowly to 0.03 inches. Furthermore, in this file the right-hand column on Page 1 is indented to the right by 0.13 inches, which increases the number of text characters that could fit on that page. Multiplecolumn, multiple-page documents do not exhibit such margin formatting discrepancies between page one and page two by default. Rather, such formatting discrepancies in a document likely result from manipulation of the margins by a user.

There also is a difference in the line spacing of the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file between the left and right columns on Page 1. While the left-hand column is configured to be single-spaced, a custom spacing of .99 spacing is applied to a portion of the right-hand column. This spacing, which is very unusual and is slightly tighter than single-spacing, allows more text to fit on the first page.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 41 of 102 These formatting differences between Page 1 and Page 2 of the modified documents can be seen in this screenshot from the document “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc”: Fig. 14: Screenshot Showing Document Manipulations D. All Seven Versions of the Work For Hire Document Differ From Other Contracts Between StreetFax and Third-Parties Found on the Ceglia Media Stroz Friedberg identified three other contracts related to StreetFax on the Ceglia Media, which corroborate the authenticity of the StreetFax Contract and demonstrate the inauthenticity of the Work for Hire Document.

Specifically, Stroz Friedberg found the files REDACTED REDACTED and “2_work for hire SF template.doc” on the Ceglia Media.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 42 of 102 REDACTED In addition, one of these documents, “2_work for hire SF template.doc,” has language that is similar to the StreetFax Contract. Specifically, the language in the “Payment Terms” section of the “2_work for hire SF template.doc” file is similar to the “Payment Terms” section of the StreetFax Contract.

REDACTED REDACTED On the other hand, the internal formatting of the Work for Hire Document and the seven versions of that document is unusual, is not consistent, and appears to have been manipulated to permit more text characters to fit on Page 1.

Filed 03/26/12 Page 43 of 102 Other Evidence of Electronic Forgery Stroz Friedberg found other evidence of electronic forgery on the Ceglia Media.

A. One of the Versions of the Work for Hire Document Contains Metadata That Reveals Mr. Ceglia’s Step-By-Step Construction of the Document One of the seven versions of the Work for Hire Document previously discussed is the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file. The “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file is a Microsoft Word file that contains what appears to be an unsigned copy of the Work for Hire Document. The document was produced by Mr.

The “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” document contains “Last 10 Authors” metadata, which is information automatically preserved by older version of Microsoft Word concerning recent editing of the document.

Specifically, this metadata lists the last ten users to edit the document, as well as the names and locations of the file when each user edited it. This metadata reveals who authored or edited a document, whether a document’s name has been changed over time, and whether a final document was based on an earlier document.

The Last 10 Authors metadata of the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” appears below: Author

Computer User C:\Documents and Settings\GRACE\Desktop\Maybe got it\Page 1\page1feb4threepm.doc Computer User C:\DOCUME~1\GRACE\Desktop\page1feb4threepm.doc Computer User C\DOCUME~1\GRACE\LOCALS~1\Temp\AutoRecovery save of MP1.asd Computer User C\DOCUME~1\GRACE\Desktop\merged\MP1and2.doc Computer User C:\Documents and Settings\GRACE\Desktop\merged\Zuck Contract.doc Computer User C:\DOCUME~1\GRACE\LOCALS~1\Temp\AutoRecovery save of Work for Hire Document.asd Computer User C:\DOCUME~1\GRACE\Desktop\CONTRA~1\Work for Hire Document.doc Paul C C:\Documents and Settings\GRACE\Desktop\Finished Docs\Work for Hire Document.doc Paul C C:\DOCUME~1\GRACE\Desktop\Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc Paul C A:\Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc Fig. 15: Last Ten Authors Metadata of “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” The file names of the two copies of the document are different. The document produced by Mr. Argentieri is named “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc,” while the document produced by Mr. Ceglia on a CD is named “Copy1_Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc.” However, Stroz Friedberg determined that the files were identical based on a hash value comparison.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 44 of 102 This Last 10 Authors metadata reveals how the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file was constructed. The first entry in the Last 10 Authors metadata shows a file called “page1feb4threepm.doc” saved in a folder on the user’s desktop called “Maybe got it\Page 1.” It then was saved as a new file, “MP1and2.doc,” in a new desktop folder called “merged.” It then was renamed as “Zuck Contract.doc,” moved to a new desktop folder called “Finished Docs,” and then renamed again as “Work for Hire Contract.doc.” The document then was saved directly to the computer desktop and to a removable media device (e.g., a floppy disk) as “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” with an Author “Paul C.” Based on Stroz Friedberg’s experience in electronic forgery cases, the names and paths in the Last 10 Authors metadata of the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file reveal an attempt to construct a fraudulent document. Specifically, this metadata suggests that the user “Paul C.” created a two-page modified version of the Work for Hire Document, purportedly dated April 28, 2003, by merging separate pages together. The file name also indicates that the initial document was created or edited at 3:00 p.m. on February 4.

The earliest entry in the Last 10 Authors metadata shows the document as a file in a folder called “Maybe got it\Page 1.” Moreover, the last printed date of the document is February 15, 2011, while the document’s last modified date is April 25, 2003. As discussed above, absent backdating or manipulation of the system clock, it is not possible for a file’s last printed date to post-date its last modification date. Therefore, this document was fabricated on or after February 15, 2011. This date is years after the Work for Hire Document was allegedly signed and months after Mr. Ceglia filed this lawsuit.

Furthermore, an entry in the Last 10 Authors metadata of the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” reveals that the document was prepared on another computer not yet disclosed or in a user folder later deleted.

Specifically, the first path present in the Last 10 Authors metadata, “C:\Documents and Settings\GRACE\ Desktop\Maybe got it\Page 1\page1feb4threepm.doc,” shows that the file was saved in a folder on the desktop of a user named “GRACE.” None of the Ceglia Media, which consist of hundreds of pieces of media, including computers, hard drives, floppy disks, and CDs, contain a profile for a user named “GRACE.” Thus, Stroz Friedberg determined that the “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc” file was edited on a computer that was not produced, or on a computer that was produced but from which the “GRACE” user profile had been deleted.

While the year is not present in the file, the February date reflected in the file name is inconsistent with the file being created in April 2003 and consistent with the file being created in February 2011. Moreover, the last printed date of February 15, 2011 establishes that the document was in use in February 2011.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 45 of 102 B. Use of a Hex Editor Stroz Friedberg found evidence that a hex editor or similar tool was used on the Ceglia Media to alter electronic documents. A hex editor is a type of program that allows a user to edit the binary contents of a file, which is the raw data that makes up a file, rather than the text of the file. Hex editors often are used to create fraudulent electronic documents because they allow for the manipulation of data at a level that makes traditional digital forensic analysis of the alterations to the document more difficult, if not impossible, to detect.

When viewed programmatically using a software utility like Metadata Assistant, which is a common way to view embedded metadata, the Last 10 Authors metadata of the document named “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” appears as follows: Fig. 16: Last 10 Authors Metadata for SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc Viewed with Metadata Assistant Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 47 of 102 In contrast, when viewed manually using the tool EnCase Forensic, the embedded metadata shows that that the document named “SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc” originated as a document in the folder “C:\Documents and Settings\iasia\My Documents\StreetFax\ Contracts\WorkForHires” and was authored by the user “BRENDAN CEGLIA:” Fig. 17: Last 10 Authors Metadata for SFWebWorkForHireMZ.doc Viewed with a Forensic Utility This shows that embedded metadata about the last ten users to edit the document is available, but only when the document is viewed with the use of a digital forensic tool. However, when viewed through ordinary means, the metadata is misaligned and not fully available. This suggests that changes have been made to the file in such a way that do not preserve its structure, including its metadata fields, which is indicative of the use of a hex editor or similar tool to manipulate the file.

C. Backdating of the System Clock on the Computer that Contained the Seagate Hard Drive Stroz Friedberg found evidence that the system clock of the computer that contained the Seagate Hard Drive was backdated between December 30, 2010 and February 11, 2011.

As described above, this is the same computer that contained the StreetFax Contract and the StreetFax Emails.

Modern Microsoft Windows operating systems - like those operating on the Ceglia Media - automatically attempt to set the system clock to the correct time by synchronizing the local computer’s system clock with a network time server maintained by Microsoft. If the difference between the local system clock and the Microsoft network time server is more than 54,000 seconds, or fifteen hours, an error message is recorded in the computer’s System Event logs.

Mr. Ceglia did not produce the physical computer that once contained the Seagate Hard Drive. Thus, as explained further below, Stroz Friedberg was unable to examine this computer, which might have contained information about the system clock settings or that otherwise was relevant to authenticity.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 48 of 102 Stroz Friedberg analyzed the System Events logs on the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert, which is a forensic image of the Seagate Hard Drive made on March 29, 2011. Those logs contain an error message that reveals system clock backdating. Specifically, when the computer’s system clock was set to November 9, 2010, it was approximately 8,098,049 seconds, or approximately 94 days, behind the time of the Microsoft network time server.

Fig. 18: System Event Log from Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert Showing Backdating The actual date and time reported by the Microsoft network server was February 11, 2011. This means that, sometime on or before February 11, 2011, this computer’s system clock was backdated approximately 94 days to November 9, 2010.

Stroz Friedberg identified additional anomalies concerning the backdating of the system clock on the computer that once contained the Seagate Hard Drive. The Windows XP operating system generates limited system backups called “System Restore Points” upon the occurrence of certain events, including Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 49 of 102 the installation of applications and the application of updates to the operating system. The operating system sequentially numbers restore points as it adds and removes them from the computer on a first-in, first-out basis. As a result, two sequentially-numbered restore points should have chronologicallysequential timestamps.

Stroz Friedberg analyzed the system restore points found on the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert. Those restore points are not sequential: System Restore Point Name Restore Point File System Creation Date

Based on this evidence of system clock backdating, Stroz Friedberg determined that between December 30, 2010 and February 11, 2011, during the pendency of this litigation, the system clock of the computer that contained the Seagate Hard Drive was backdated.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 50 of 102 XIII. Evidence of Spoliation Stroz Friedberg found substantial evidence of spoliation on the Ceglia Media. This evidence includes multiple reinstallations of the Windows operating system on the hard drives that contained the StreetFax Contract. It also includes the deletion of relevant files in February 2011 and the deactivation of an email account in August 2010 - both occurring during the pendency of the litigation.

A. There Were Multiple Reinstallations of the Windows Operating System on the Seagate Hard Drive During the Pendency of Litigation The installation date of a Windows operating system is tracked in a computer’s registry, which is comprised of a series of files. The reinstallation of an operating system is a destructive action that may have the effect of overwriting existing data on a hard drive. In Stroz Friedberg’s experience with electronic forgery cases, the reinstallation of an operating system can be done in an effort to destroy or conceal data.

Stroz Friedberg determined that the Windows operating system on the Seagate Hard Drive and the Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert of that drive was reinstalled on at least two occasions.

Again, the Seagate Hard Drive and forensic image of that drive are the two pieces of Ceglia Media on which the StreetFax Contract was found. Both reinstallations were performed during the pendency of this litigation, and the second reinstallation occurred at a time when the computer’s system clock was backdated.

The Forensic Image Created by Plaintiff’s Expert has a Windows operating system installation date of December 29, 2010. In addition, the file system metadata of files in the recovery environment on the forensic image of the Seagate Hard Drive, which can be used to reinstall the Windows operating system on a computer, reflect last accessed dates in late December 2010, which is consistent with an attempt to reinstall the operating system at that time. The forensic image of the Seagate Hard Drive was created on March 29, 2011. Thus, as of March 29, 2011, the Seagate Hard Drive itself had a Windows operating system reinstallation date of December 29, 2010.

However, the purported operating system installation date on the actual Seagate Hard Drive at the time it was imaged by Stroz Friedberg is not December 29, 2010. Rather, it is two days earlier, December 27, The reinstallation of an operating system can be done in a manner that does not delete documents on the hard drive. However, even in these circumstances, potentially valuable information, such as system settings or log files, may be lost or deleted. In addition, the reinstallation process may overwrite deleted documents or files that otherwise would have been recoverable.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 51 of 102 2010. This means that the Windows operating system was reinstalled on the Seagate Hard Drive for a second time, sometime after the imaging occurred on March 29, 2011. This reinstallation occurred at a time when the system clock of the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive was backdated to December 27, 2010.

Stroz Friedberg also found Internet history records on the Ceglia Media that reveal web searches that may be related to this backdating and reinstallation. On December 28, 2010, a user of the Ceglia Media ran a Google search for “when did windows xp release.” Then, on January 25, 2011, a user of the Ceglia Media ran a Google search for “look up the date a hp computer was made.” These exploratory searches may be indicative of someone conducting research on reinstalling a Windows operating system on a computer in a backdated state. In Stroz Friedberg’s experience with electronic forgery cases, such exploratory research efforts may be conducted in an attempt to avoid obvious backdating errors, such as backdating a computer to a date earlier than the date on which the Windows operating system used became available.

Significantly, Mr. Ceglia did not produce the computer that once contained the Seagate Hard Drive. As such, Stroz Friedberg was unable to analyze the date and time of the system clock of the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive. Dates and times on digital media are set according to the system clock of the computers used to access them. One step in the digital forensic process is to document, whenever possible, the date and time of a computer’s system clock. This provides digital forensic examiners the ability to ascertain and account for any discrepancies between the date and time settings of the system clock and the true date and time. Because Mr. Ceglia did not produce the computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive, Stroz Friedberg was unable to determine whether that computer’s clock was accurate.

B. Deletion of Relevant Files in February 2011 As discussed above, floppy disks produced by Mr. Ceglia contain records of deleted files named “mark emails 082903,” “Work for Hire ContractMZ.doc,” and “Work for hire SF template.doc.” Based on the metadata, the deleted files - which in their titles appear relevant to the issues in this case - were last accessed on February 18, 2011. Therefore, the files were deleted on or after that date, during the pendency of the litigation.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 52 of 102 C. Deactivation of Webmail Account in August 2010 As discussed below, Mr. Ceglia failed to disclose several webmail accounts, including the Yahoo! account “landlubber39@yahoo.com,” for which he is the registered account holder. This webmail account was closed by Yahoo! on August 4, 2010, at Mr. Ceglia’s request. When the account was closed on August 4, 2010 - more than a month after the initial complaint was filed - Mr. Ceglia was notified that Yahoo! would delete the content of the webmail account in 90 days. Although Stroz Friedberg received data from this account from Yahoo!, Stroz Friedberg did not identify any evidence that Mr. Ceglia took action to preserve the email in this account.

D. Deletion of Data from getzuck@gmail.com Webmail Account As previously discussed, Stroz Friedberg identified the existence of a webmail account getzuck@gmail.com through an analysis of Internet history on the eMachines computer. Specifically, the Internet history showed that the Ceglia Media was used on April 18, 2011 to read an email related to the activation of a Facebook account for the email address getzuck@gmail.com. Thus, this email address was in use in April 2011 and presumably contained emails from that time period.

Stroz Friedberg received a production of the getzuck@gmail.com webmail account from Google pursuant to Mr. Ceglia’s consent. Upon analysis, Stroz Friedberg determined that the earliest email in this account dated from January 28, 2012. This fact, coupled with the fact that the email account was in use well before that date, suggests that the earlier email data was deleted from this account.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 53 of 102 XIV. Evidence of Undisclosed Media Stroz Friedberg found evidence of several removable storage devices and webmail accounts on the Ceglia Media that Mr. Ceglia did not turn over or identify.

A. Undisclosed Removable Storage Devices (USBs) Stroz Friedberg found evidence of six electronic media that were not produced by Mr. Ceglia. The undisclosed media appear to be USB devices, which are removable data storage devices used to save and transport data. At least one of these devices was used as recently as April 4, 2011, and three of the six devices were used during the pendency of this litigation.

When a USB device is plugged into a computer running a modern version of Microsoft Windows, the operating system records the first time the device was connected in both the Windows Registry, which is a database of operating system and user settings, and in log files named “setupapi.log” or “setupapi.dev.log.” The Windows Registry files and “setupapi” logs of the Ceglia Media contain evidence that the following six USB devices were connected to those computers or hard drives: Device Name Internal Identifier Gigaware USB Device 20051942520C8D20CDB2&0 Seagate FreeAgent GoFlex USB Device NA056T98&0 SanDisk Cruzer Micro USB Device 200524439016A86122A2&0 USB 2.0 USB Flash Drive USB Device 76562f5793a65e&0 Ut165 USB2FlashStorage USB Device 00000000000069&0 Kingston DataTraveler 2.0 USB Device 5B8407000A4B&0 Mr. Ceglia did not produce any of these six USB devices to Stroz Friedberg.

Through an analysis of the “setupapi.log” and “setupapi.dev.log” files, Stroz Friedberg determined that the Seagate FreeAgent GoFlex USB Device, internal identifier NA056T98&0, had been connected to Mr.

Ceglia’s Toshiba Satellite laptop computer as recently as April 4, 2011. In addition, two other removable devices were connected as recently as June 30, 2010. Below is a chart documenting the connections of the undisclosed devices to the Ceglia Media on or after June 30, 2010: Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Device Name Internal Identifier Filed 03/26/12 Page 54 of 102 Ceglia Media Date of Connection Gigaware USB Device 20051942520C8D20CDB2&0 Toshiba Satellite Laptop 9/16/2010 Gigaware USB Device 20051942520C8D20CDB2&0 eMachines Desktop 8/17/2010 Forensic Image SanDisk Cruzer Micro USB Device 200524439016A86122A2&0 Created by Plaintiff's Expert 12/29/2010 SanDisk Cruzer Micro USB Device 200524439016A86122A2&0 Toshiba Satellite Laptop 12/22/2010 SanDisk Cruzer Micro USB Device 200524439016A86122A2&0 eMachines Desktop 7/28/2010 Seagate FreeAgent GoFlex NA056T98&0 Seagate Hard Drive[2] 12/31/2010 Seagate FreeAgent GoFlex NA056T98&0 Toshiba Laptop[1] 4/4/2011 Through an analysis of link files, Stroz Friedberg also determined that the undisclosed USB devices contain relevant electronic documents. Link files are shortcuts to files or folders created so that these files and folders are readily available to a user. When a file is opened or viewed using a Windows operating system, a link file typically is created that points to the file or folder that is being accessed (the “target file” or “target folder”), and multiple link files may target the same file or folder. Although link files may not provide a complete history of every document that is viewed during the lifespan of the computer, they generally provide information about the recent activity performed by each user.

Link files contain embedded information about the files or folder they target. This information includes, among other things, the name and path, or location, of the target file or folder on the hard drive. Link files also record a snapshot of the metadata associated with the target file or folder at the time the link file was created, including the created, last written, and last accessed dates associated with the target file or folder.

On the Toshiba Satellite laptop computer, there were link files to files named “Zuckerberg Contract page1.tif” and “Zuckerberg Contract page2.tif.” The embedded metadata of these link files show that they point to target files on a removable device, such as a USB flash device, that are in a folder named “Facebook Files.” Moreover, the metadata for the two images embedded within the link files shows that the images were created on July 9, 2010. Thus, there is clear evidence that at least one of the undisclosed pieces of media contained electronic documents that are relevant to this litigation and that were not found anywhere else on the Ceglia Media.

In his August 29, 2011 declaration, Mr. Ceglia stated that these files were contained on the Gigaware USB Device that bore serial number 20051942520C8D20CDB2&O. (Ceglia August 29, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 132, at ¶ 132).

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 55 of 102 In sum, Stroz Friedberg’s analysis revealed the existence of six removable devices that were not turned over or identified by Mr. Ceglia. Some of those devices contain or contained relevant electronic documents. One of those devices was used as recently as April 2011.

B. Undisclosed Webmail Accounts Stroz Friedberg found evidence of the use of four undisclosed webmail accounts in the Internet history on the Ceglia Media, none of which had been identified by Mr. Ceglia to the Court or the Defendants prior to their discovery by Stroz Friedberg. These accounts were used or appear to be associated with Mr.

When a user visits a website, the web browsing activity may be logged by the Internet browser in an Internet history file. The Internet history on the Ceglia Media shows four undisclosed email addresses that appear to be associated with Mr. Ceglia: landlubber39@yahoo.com; paulc@hush.com; getzuck@gmail.com; and alleganypellets@gmail.com.

The available information regarding these four undisclosed email accounts is as follows: The Internet history records show multiple uses of the email account landlubber39@yahoo.com by a user of the Ceglia Media. Furthermore, an August 4, 2010 email regarding the closing of the account was sent to the registered user of the account at paulceglia@msn.com, an email address that belongs to Mr. Ceglia. The Internet history records also show that the Yahoo! account contains relevant information, as it was used to correspond about this case in July 2010.

The undisclosed Hushmail account paulc@hush.com appears to have been created on November 1, 2010. Hushmail is a webmail provider that specializes in providing encrypted and secure webmail services to its users.

The Internet history records on the Ceglia Media show that the email account getzuck@gmail.com was visited by a user of the Ceglia Media on April 18, 2011 to read an email asking for an address confirmation for a Facebook membership.

Based upon the title of a webpage visit recorded by the Internet history of the Ceglia Media, the alleganypellets@gmail.com webmail account was accessed using the Ceglia Media as recently as July 15, 2010.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 56 of 102 These email accounts were not disclosed in Mr. Ceglia’s declaration pursuant to the Court’s Orders prior to their identification by Stroz Friedberg.

C. Recovered Deleted Files Mr. Ceglia produced a CD that contains multiple files with files beginning with “X,” such as the file “XWRL004.TMP.” This file naming convention suggests that these files are recovered versions of files that had been deleted from one or more other storage devices and burned to this CD.

Microsoft Word can create temporary files with file names of the following convention: “~WRL###.TMP.” For example, “~WRL004.TMP” is a file name that would match this convention. However, the file named “XWRL004.TMP” appears to be a Microsoft Word temporary file that does not follow this file naming convention, in that it begins with an “X” rather than a “~.” When files are deleted from storage media that uses the FAT file system, the first character of the file name is overwritten. Since that information is no longer available, it is common for data recovery programs to prompt the user to specify a replacement first character when a recovery attempt is made.

Here, multiple files on the floppy disk with names beginning with “X,” such as the file named “XWRL004.TMP,” suggest that a data recovery was performed and that the user who performed the data recovery chose “X” to replace the overwritten first characters of the file names. Furthermore, the data recovery effort was performed on a device or devices other the CD, as CDs do not have FAT file systems.

The CD containing these files had a volume label of “PAUL_3_23_11.” The volume label and the CD metadata indicate that the CD was created on March 23, 2011, during the pendency of this litigation.

No corresponding copy of the recovered file “XWRL004.TMP” was present anywhere else on the Ceglia Media. The existence of a recovered deleted file on a CD created after the litigation was initiated, with no corresponding file on a produced computer or removable storage device, suggests that the source of this recovered deleted file has not been produced.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 57 of 102 XV. Evidence Rebutting Paul Ceglia’s Allegations Based on the totality of the digital forensic evidence, Stroz Friedberg has determined that the StreetFax Emails and the attached StreetFax Contract are authentic. The digital forensic evidence shows that the pages of the StreetFax Contract are scanned images of a paper document, dated April 28, 2003, between Mr. Zuckerberg and StreetFax; that the scanned images were created on the Ceglia Media on March 3, 2004; and that the scanned images were sent as attachments to two emails from ceglia@adelphia.net to jkole@sidley.com on March 3, 2004.

Stroz Friedberg understands that Mr. Ceglia has argued that the StreetFax Contract is fabricated and forged. Specifically, Mr. Ceglia stated that the StreetFax Contract is a “doctored,” “photoshopped” image that Mr. Zuckerberg or the Orrick law firm “planted” on his computers. Mr. Ceglia’s attorney, Dean Boland, also stated that the StreetFax Contract is “obviously forged.” Mr. Ceglia stated that he “[does] not recall authoring or sending the [StreetFax Emails and StreetFax Contract] to Jim Kole.” (Ceglia November 17, 2011 Declaration, Doc. No. 230, at ¶ 7). Finally, Mr. Ceglia implied that Mr. Zuckerberg personally sent the StreetFax Contract to Mr. Kole, stating that “Mark Zuckerberg [] had all the credentials necessary to access and to send and receive email via my father’s ceglia@adelphia.net email account.” (Id. at ¶ 21).

These statements are contradicted by the evidence described in this report, which indicates that Mr.

Ceglia sent the StreetFax Emails and the StreetFax Contract to Mr. Kole on March 3, 2004. In addition, Stroz Friedberg found no evidence on the Ceglia Media to support these assertions by Mr. Ceglia and his counsel.

To begin, it would be extraordinarily difficult for an individual, even a person with significant technical expertise, to “plant” the StreetFax Emails on the Ceglia Media or Sidley Austin’s servers. And it would be even harder to “plant” the StreetFax Emails in both locations.

Initially, a person attempting to fabricate and “plant” the StreetFax Emails would have to correctly guess numerous authenticating details. For example, the person would have to know or guess about the existing relationship between Mr. Ceglia and Mr. Kole and have Mr. Kole’s correct email address at Sidley Austin. He or she also would have had to know or correctly guess the telephone number set forth in the body of the first StreetFax Email.

In addition, the person would have had to create metadata consistent with authentic emails in a way that could not be detected through digital forensic analysis. The person would have had to generate metadata Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 58 of 102 for both of the StreetFax Emails, including creation dates and last modified dates, that are consistent with the emails having been sent on March 3, 2004.

The person would then have had to insert the StreetFax Emails in the two different container files in which they were found: the “Sent Items.dbx” file on the Ceglia Media and the Microsoft Outlook PST file on a Sidley Austin server, again in a way that could not be detected through digital forensic analysis. These container files were stored on hard drives controlled by Mr. Ceglia and Sidley Austin, respectively. The person would have had to insert the StreetFax Emails in these container files without altering the metadata on those container files as well.

Stroz Friedberg also found separate corrobating evidence, in an application called Google Desktop,

Even if that could all be accomplished, the person would have had to create fraudulent Internet headers, reflecting the transmission of the StreetFax Emails through the Internet. This would require a significant amount of authenticating detail. For example, the person creating the Internet headers would have had to know or guess that Adelphia was Mr. Ceglia’s Internet service provider. The person also would have had to know or guess the names and IP addresses of two different servers at Sidley Austin.

Taken together, to accomplish all of these required steps on multiple machines, without detection, would be extremely difficult.

There is no digital forensic evidence to support the speculation that these files were “planted” on the Ceglia Media and a Sidley Austin server. This explanation for the existence of the StreetFax Contract and StreetFax Emails on the Ceglia Media and on a Sidley Austin server is neither reasonable nor supported by any evidence. Based on the digital forensic evidence, Stroz Friedberg has determined that there is only one plausible explanation for the existence of the StreetFax Contract and StreetFax Emails The Google Desktop application allows a user to efficiently search a computer for files containing specific keywords and review those documents within the application. The application does so by building a searchable database, or index, of the contents of the files on the computer and allowing a user to search this database through the Google Desktop interface. For purposes of Stroz Friedberg’s digital forensic analysis, the Google Desktop index provides historical evidence of what files existed on the Seagate Hard Drive at the point in time when Google Desktop last indexed the files.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 59 of 102 on the Ceglia Media and a Sidley Austin server: they were saved to the Seagate Hard Drive and then, within minutes, were sent from an Outlook Express client on the computer containing that hard drive, using the Adelphia email account, to Mr. Kole at Sidley Austin, on March 3, 2004.

Mr. Ceglia also has implied that Mr. Zuckerberg accessed the Adelphia email account and personally sent the StreetFax Contract to Mr. Kole on March 3, 2004. In order to have sent the StreetFax Contract and StreetFax Emails to Mr. Kole, Mr. Zuckerberg would have had to, at the very least, gain physical or remote access to and control over the desktop computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive, which was located in upstate New York. In addition, based on the digital forensic evidence, this activity would have had to occur on March 3, 2004. Stroz Friedberg did not identify any digital forensic evidence that Mr.

Zuckerberg accessed the desktop computer containing the Seagate Hard Drive, either physically or remotely, on March 3, 2004. This explanation for the existence of the StreetFax Contract and StreetFax Emails on the Ceglia Media and on a Sidley Austin server is neither reasonable nor supported by the evidence.

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 60 of 102 Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 61 of 102 Exhibit A C.V. of Eric M. Friedberg Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 62 of 102 ERIC M. FRIEDBERG CO-PRESIDENT PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE STROZ FRIEDBERG Co-President New York, NY Joined firm January 2001 Responsible for overall management of international consulting and technical services firm with offices in New York, Washington D.C., Los Angeles, London, Boston, Dallas, San Francisco, and Minneapolis, specializing in digital forensics, cyber-crime and data breach response, electronic discovery, and business intelligence and investigations. Led M&A processes for identifying, acquiring, and integrating Docuity, Inc. (an electronic discovery processing and hosting company) and Data Genetics International, L.P. (a U.K. digital forensics firm).

Negotiated and structured major private equity investments made in Stroz Friedberg by Green Capital Partners ($30mm, 2007; $7mm follow-on, 2008) and New Mountain Capital ($115mm, 2010).

National leader in responding to all forms of computer crime and abuse, including cyber-extortions, theft of trade secrets, industrial and state-sponsored espionage, leaks of confidential information, hacks and unauthorized access, denial of service attacks, illegal electronic surveillance, domain name hacks, key-logging, and Internet-based harassment.

Has managed numerous digital forensic assignments for major law firms, corporations, and government agencies in criminal, civil, regulatory, and internal corporate matters, including cases involving alleged wiping and mass deletion of data; spoliation, e-forgery, and backdating; computer-enabled theft of trade secrets; and espionage, illicit images, harassment, and hacking.

Leader in electronic discovery consulting; author of book chapters and scholarly articles on eDiscovery strategy and technology. Has managed numerous electronic discovery projects in civil and regulatory proceedings, many of which were global in scope and required the preservation, processing, and production of electronic data from hundreds of computers, servers, cell phones and PDAs, backup tapes, enterprise databases, and removable media.

Court-appointed consultant to the Special Master in Advanced Micro Devices v Intel Corp., No. 05-441-JJF (D. Del.); court-appointed third-party electronic discovery/digital forensics expert in Four Seasons Hotels v Consorcio Barr, No.

Significant matters include: Led digital forensics team that analyzed the proprietary source code behind Google’s WiFi router-mapping software. Lead writer of report to world-wide Data Privacy Authorities, the F.T.C., and the public 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6536  Fax: 212.981.6545  efriedberg@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 63 of 102 ERIC M. FRIEDBERG CO-PRESIDENT addressing concerns that the source code captured private user communications and data. See: http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/untrusted_dlcp/ww w.google.com/en//googleblogs/pdfs/friedberg_sourcecode_analysis_060 910.pdf Led four-year effort to preserve, cull, search, and produce ESI for an insurance company in response to an Attorney General’s criminal subpoenas and related civil actions. Oversaw preservation and production of data from hundreds of custodians, servers, and other data sources. Served as company’s 30(b)(6) witness in securities class action law suit. Provided strategic advice, affidavits, and testimony regarding reasonableness of preservation and production efforts.

Solved case in which ex-employees were for six months remotely accessing without authorization the e-mail of the Chairman, legal counsel, and in-house investigator of a public company. Oversaw development and production of evidence, including log analysis; initiated and conducted liaison with U.S. Secret Service, which led to prosecution and conviction of the offender.

Led digital forensics team in analysis of an investment banker’s multiple laptop computers, determining that a critical memorandum accusing another banker of foreign corrupt practices violations was forged. Expert report led investment banker to confess.

Led digital forensic team in analyzing an intrusion into an FTP server on which protected customer identity data was stored. Concluded that intruder did not access customer data, facilitating decision by company to not report under data breach notification statutes.

Led investigative team in determining who leaked sensitive internal company e-mails and information to Wall Street analysts covering the company. Oversaw forensic analysis of subjects’ computers and matched snail-mailed information received by analysts to data on the computer of a single subject within the corporation. Oversaw linguistic analysis of snail-mailed cover letter to analysts. Matched linguistic anomalies to anomalies in known writings of the subject. Oversaw private investigation which led to a postal clerk who identified the subject’s father as the person who snail-mailed the letters in question.

Led digital forensic examination of two laptop computers belonging to a CFO in an internal investigation into “trading with the enemy” allegations.

Established that just before he relinquished his computers to investigators, the CFO deleted folders relating to trading with Iran.

Oversaw development of proprietary techniques to conduct key-word search of Korean-language data in an antitrust inquiry. Oversaw the establishment of an on-site laboratory in Seoul to facilitate confidential data processing.

Oversaw multi-year electronic discovery project for Audit Committee of a public company in an accounting fraud scandal. Gathered and processed data from over 550 custodians for response to regulatory and civil subpoenas. Conducted deep forensic analysis relating to possible illegal destruction of data.

Led cyber-crime response team in identifying location within a corporate network of illegally installed “sniffer” program that was covertly capturing corporate instant message traffic. Led forensic team in analyzing laptop on which sniffer was running to identify internal employees who installed sniffer and accessed sniffed IMs. Conducted interviews of multiple IT staff members, obtaining confessions from some and exonerating others in illegal scheme.

Senior Litigation Counsel, November 1999 to December 2000 Computer and Telecommunications Coordinator, December 1997 to December 2000 Chief, Narcotics Unit, December 1994 to November 1997 Deputy Chief, Narcotics Unit, January 1993 to November 1994 Line Assistant, April 1989 to December 1992 New York, NY As Computer and Telecommunications Coordinator: Investigated and prosecuted cases involving computer hacks, denial of service attacks, Internet-related trade secret theft, criminal trademark and copyright infringement, computer hardware and software counterfeiting, telecommunications billing fraud, and illegal electronic surveillance.

Participated in the establishment of enforcement policy, built relationships with client agencies, and supervised up to five Assistant U.S. Attorneys.

As Chief of Narcotics and in other positions: Investigated, litigated, and handled appeals of complex cases involving narcotics trafficking, money laundering, drug-related violence, racketeering, securities fraud, and public corruption. Numerous trials, ranging from one to eight weeks in length.

Participated in the establishment of narcotics and money laundering enforcement policy, built relationships with client agencies, and supervised up to 15 Assistant U.S. Attorneys and two Deputy Chiefs.

Received 1994 Department of Justice Award for Superior Performance for investigation and prosecution of six accomplices in Cali Cartelordered assassination of Manuel de Dios Unanue, the former editor-inchief of El Diario.

SKADDEN, ARPS, SLATE, MEAGHER & FLOM LLP Associate Attorney, Litigation Department New York, NY 1983 to 1989 Participated in all phases of intellectual property, takeover, general commercial, and product liability litigation, including two jury trials and several preliminary injunction hearings.

EDUCATION BROOKLYN LAW SCHOOL J.D. 1983, magna cum laude BRANDEIS UNIVERSITY B.A. Philosophy, 1978, cum laude Varsity soccer, 1973, 1974, 1975 PUBLICATIONS March 2008: New Electronic Discovery Teams, Roles & Functions, a white paper published by The Sedona Conference.

October 2006: Co-authored “Lost Back-up Tapes, Stolen Laptops and Other Tales of Data Breach Woe,” an article published in Computer and Internet Lawyer.

July 2005: To Recycle or Not to Recycle, That Is The Hot Backup Tape Question, a white paper published in the Practicing Law Institute's Fifth Annual Municipal Law Institute course materials.

May 2004: Co-authored “Your Company’s Computer System,” Chapter One in the book E-Discovery: A Guide for Corporate Counsel, published by Sills Cummis Epstein & Gross P.C.

January 2004: “To Cache a Thief: How Litigants and Lawyers Tamper with Electronic Evidence and Why They Get Caught,” an article published in The American Lawyer magazine.

November 2003: Co-authored “21st Century Forensics: Searching for the 'Smoking Gun' in Computer Hard Drives,” an article published in The Prosecutor, the monthly publication of the National District Attorneys Association.

LECTURES July 2010: Led Information Systems Security Association (ISSA) industry webinar entitled “Social Networking Forensics”.

January 2009: Presented a lecture entitled “New Electronic Discovery Teams, Roles, & Functions” at the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.

June 2008: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Data Breach Investigation and Response” at the Practical Privacy Series, hosted by the International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP).

May 2008: Led a panel discussion entitled “Barbarians at the Cybergate” at the New York CIO Executive Summit.

May 2008: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Forensics, an Executive Overview” at the CISO Executive Forum, hosted by the Information Systems Security Association (ISSA).

April 2008: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “E-Discovery in Insurance” at the Electronic Discovery Seminar, hosted by DRI.

November 2007: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Preservation: From Legal Holds to Preservation Methodologies” at the Advance E-Discovery Technology Workshop at Georgetown University Law Center.

September 2007: Led a panel discussion entitled “Cyber-crime: The Insider Threat” for the New York Chapter of the Association of Corporate Counsel of America (ACCA).

June 5, 2007: Delivered a lecture on “The Challenges Confronting the Digital Forensics Community” to The National Academies' Committee on Identifying the Needs of the Forensic Sciences Community.

June 2007: Participated in a panel discussion for The Association of Corporate Counsel of America (ACCA) 2007 Ethics Marathon at Pfizer Corp.

June 2007: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Computer Forensics and Auditing” for the ABA.

March 29, 2007: Participated as a Faculty Member for the Sedona Conference Institute event in Memphis, Tennessee, entitled "Getting Ahead of the eDiscovery Curve: Strategies for Companies & Their Counsel to Reduce Costs and Meet Judicial Expectations" and as a panel member for a presentation entitled "Changing Corporate Culture: Creating & Managing New Relationships to Effectively Respond to Discovery & Investigations." February 21, 2007: Led a panel discussion entitled "Compliance: Using Computer Forensics to Ensure Process/Protocol" for the members of the Greater New York Chapter of the ACCA.

December 6, 2006: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Fundamentals of e-Discovery” for the New York State Bar Association.

December 5, 2006: Participated in a panel discussion entitled “Identity Theft: Understanding the New Laws and Ways to Protect Your Clients and Yourself from Becoming a Victim” at the Association of the Bar of the City of New York.

November 6, 2006: Delivered a lecture entitled “Data Breach Notification: Technology, Strategy, and Law” to the members of the ACCA of Greater N.Y.

March 16, 2006: Delivered a lecture entitled "Computer Forensics: Technology, Strategy and Law" to the Communications and Media Law Committee of the New York City Bar Association.

February 2, 2006: Delivered a lecture entitled "Computer Forensics: Technology, Strategy and Law" at Brooklyn Law School.

March 16, 2005: Delivered a lecture entitled "Computer Forensics: Technology, Strategy and Law" to the Communications and Media Law Committee of the New York City Bar Association.

October 27, 2005: Participated in a panel discussion on "Electronic Discovery in Litigation and What It Means for the European Company" at the Fall 2005 meeting for the International Section of the American Bar Association.

July 27, 2005: Gave a presentation on "Electronic Discovery" for the Practicing Law Institute's Fifth Annual Municipal Law Institute.

April 6, 2005: Participated in a panel presentation with Hon. Shira A. Scheindlin, U.S. District Judge, Southern District of New York; Hon. Ira Warshawsky, Supreme Court Judge, Nassau County; and David J. Lender, Esq., Weil Gotshal & Manges LLP, on "E-Discovery: The Basics and Beyond" at the New York State Judicial Institute.

February 23, 2005: Delivered a lecture entitled "Computer Forensics in Support of Litigation" to the Association of the Bar of the City of New York January 12, 2005: Gave a presentation entitled "Handling Child Pornography Discovered During a Forensic Examination" at the Quarterly Meeting for the New York Electronic Crimes Task Force (NYECTF) of the U.S. Secret Service and John Jay College of Criminal Justice.

October 1, 2004: Delivered a lecture entitled “To Cache a Thief: E-Evidence Tampering," which addressed using computer forensics to determine whether electronic documents were tampered with or are authentic, at the Association of Legal Administrators Region 5 Educational Conference.

PRO BONO Member, Advisory Committee to the President of Brooklyn Law School. Advise President on strategic issues relating to positioning, marketing, recruiting, retention, and fundraising.

Consultant to the Global Network Initiative (GNI), an international consortium of communication and information providers, human rights groups, and academics committed to upholding global human rights norms, privacy rights, and freedom of expression in the electronic sharing and transmission of information. Assist GNI in developing a practical mechanism to monitor members’ compliance with GNI principles without compromising private information, legitimate government requests for information, and efficient business functions. Advise on impact of domestic and foreign privacy laws, including ECPA, FISA, Title III, grand jury secrecy laws, and law enforcement power to compel secrecy, including in connection with search warrants, grand jury subpoenas, criminal and national security wiretaps, and NSLs.

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS Member, International Association of Privacy Professionals Former member, The Sedona Conference Working Group on Electronic Discovery Former member, E-Discovery Subcommittee of the New York State Bar Association’s Commercial and Federal Litigation Section Former Member, Information Technology Law Committee of the New York City Bar Association 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6536  Fax: 212.981.6545  efriedberg@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 70 of 102 Exhibit B C.V. of Bryan J. Rose Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 71 of 102 BRYAN J. ROSE M AN AGING DIRECTOR PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE STROZ FRIEDBERG, LLC Managing Director New York, NY 2005 to Present Supervise digital forensic, electronic discovery, and cyber-crime response cases in the firm’s New York City office. Head the firm’s New York City office and supervise that office’s Digital Forensic Examiners. Oversee and work on an active case load of digital forensic, cybercrime response, electronic discovery, and private investigations assignments. Give Continuing Legal Education lectures to law firms and government clients. Significant cases include: Oversaw the on-site preservation and harvesting in Mexico of sensitive and confidential electronic data from a server and scores of laptops, desktops, and removable storage devices for a multi-national corporation in a high-stakes civil litigation. Supervised on-site processing to facilitate attorney review and to protect the confidentiality of extremely sensitive client documents.

Led incident response in a high-profile data breach and computer crime investigation. Helped determine the nature and scope of the attack and identify potentially-compromised customer data. Assisted inside and outside counsel in formulating responses to regulatory and other inquiries.

Helped lead global electronic discovery consulting project for a Fortune 10 company. Assessed and catalogued the kinds and sources of electronic data maintained by the company and consulted on the proper handling of that electronic data, including compliance with litigation holds and other retention obligations. Prepared litigation-response plans to coordinate consistent disclosures about electronic data in a litigation context and to ensure the proper preservation and production of electronic data in criminal, civil, and regulatory matters.

Spearheaded a team of digital forensic examiners and private investigators that preserved and analyzed network security logs to identify the source, duration, and extent of an unauthorized access into corporate file servers and, armed with that forensic proof, obtained a confession from an ex-employee of the corporation.

Provided consulting services to a Fortune 500 company whose confidential data had been lost by a third party due to the theft of a laptop. Reviewed the security procedures used to determine what confidential information had been on the stolen laptop, thereby providing the company with important assurances that it had taken reasonable and adequate steps to identify the lost confidential information.

Assistant United States Attorney Brooklyn, NY 2002 to 2005 Investigated, litigated, and handled appeals of complex criminal cases involving narcotics trafficking, money laundering, drug-related violence, racketeering, organized crime, and terrorism as a member of the General Crimes, Narcotics, and Violent Crimes & Terrorism Sections. Conducted numerous trials, ranging from one to six weeks in length.

SOLICITOR GENERAL, OFFICE OF THE ILLINOIS ATTORNEY GENERAL Assistant Attorney General Chicago, IL 2000 to 2002 Handled appeals in complex civil cases involving constitutional law, statutory construction, government contracts, and tort liability. Briefed and argued numerous cases before both state and federal courts of appeals.

THE HONORABLE JOEL M. FLAUM, CHIEF JUDGE, UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE SEVENTH CIRCUIT Law Clerk Chicago, IL 1999 to 2000 Prepared memoranda and assisted in drafting opinions in civil and criminal matters briefed and argued before the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit.

EDUCATION UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA SCHOOL OF LAW J.D. 1999, with High Distinction Editor-in-Chief, Virginia Law Review Order of the Coif Hardy Cross Dillard Scholar Elected to The Raven Society INDIANA UNIVERSITY M.A. Religious Studies, 1996 Associate Instructor, Afro-American Studies Department B.A. History and Religious Studies, 1992, magna cum laude 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6549  Fax: 212.981.6545  brose@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 73 of 102 BRYAN J. ROSE M AN AGING DIRECTOR PUBLICATIONS Fall 2001: Bryan J. Rose and Richard A. Merrill, FDA Regulation of Human Cloning: Usurpation or Statesmanship?, HARVARD JOURNAL OF LAW & TECHNOLOGY.

Fall 1999: Bryan J. Rose, Indian Land, Indian Religion, and the Religion Clauses, VIRGINIA JOURNAL OF SOCIAL POLICY & THE LAW.

LECTURES January 24, 2012: Participate in a panel discussion entitled, “Obtaining Computer Evidence in Trade Secret Litigation” for the New York Bar Association.

December 14, 2011: Participated in a panel discussion entitled, “Understanding the Securities Laws 2011” at the Practising Law Institute.

April 29, 2011: Participated in a panel discussion entitled, “Detecting ‘Red Flag’ Accounting Issues and ‘Cooking the Books’ Problems in Corporate and Securities Deals” at Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP.

September 23, 2010: Gave a lecture entitled, “Using Digital Forensics & Data From Social Networking Sites to Your Client’s Best Advantage: Legal, Business & Ethical Issues” for the New York City Bar.

December 8, 2006: Participated in a panel discussion entitled, “Fundamentals of e-Discovery” for the New York State Bar Association.

November 13, 2006: Gave a lecture entitled, “Identifying Relevant Electronic Data: Technical, Strategic & Legal Factors that Drive Effective Electronic Discovery” for the New York City Bar.

October 17, 2006: Gave a lecture entitled, “Computer Forensics: Technology, Law & Strategy” for the New Jersey Security Association.

October 12, 2006: Gave a lecture entitled, “Computer Forensics: Technology, Law & Strategy” for the Society of Investigators of Greater Newark.

September 19, 2006: Gave a lecture entitled, “The Art of the Interview” for the New York City Bar.

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS Member, The Sedona Conference, Working Group 1 on Electronic Document Retention and Production 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6549  Fax: 212.981.6545  brose@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 74 of 102 Exhibit C C.V. of Michael F. McGowan Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 75 of 102 MICHAEL F. MCGOW AN DIRECTOR, DIGIT AL FORENSICS PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE STROZ FRIEDBERG, LLC Director, Digital Forensics, April 2006 to Present Assistant Director of Computer Forensics, February 2004 to April 2006 Consultant and Computer Forensic Examiner, June 2003 to February 2004 New York, NY Responsible for co-managing the firm’s digital forensics operations. Conduct cyber-crime investigations, including investigations of network intrusions, anonymous and harassing emails, and thefts of trade secrets. Perform forensic examinations and acquisitions of electronic media, including computer hard drives, backup tapes, and mobile phones. Respond to significant breaches of confidential and personally identifiable information. Lead efforts to investigate and remediate, to the extent possible, lapses in litigation holds. Perform statistical analyses and data analytics of disparate data sets. Provide expert witness testimony in civil and criminal cases. Significant cases include: Located, preserved, and forensically analyzed the metadata of a smoking-gun electronic memorandum in the Enron “Barge” investigation.

Conducted forensic investigations of several laptop computers. Authored an expert opinion proving that the subject of an internal corporate investigation backdated a key memorandum accusing a rival banker of violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act.

Participated in the design and implementation of an anti-money laundering transaction monitoring database and data analytics on behalf of an international bank in connection with a criminal investigation by the Department of Justice and Federal Reserve. Performed data analysis and helped develop an automated transaction monitoring system.

Investigated a lapse in a financial service company’s retention of data subject to regulatory retention requirements. Determined the root cause and quantified the extent of the lapse through forensic analysis, review of log files, and interviews of technical representatives. Presented findings to the company’s regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Led comprehensive risk assessment of other critical data systems. Provided recommendations to guard against future data loss and presented findings to the company’s Board of Directors.

Preserved and analyzed web, event, and domain logs to determine whether a SQL injection attack compromised customer credit card and identity information.

Led efforts to reconstruct and forensically analyze more than two terabytes of data in response to one of the largest potential exposures of personally identifiable information.

Pioneered a methodology for searching Korean-language documents, emails, and email attachments for a response to a criminal grand jury subpoena in a price-fixing investigation. Conducted on-site processing to facilitate attorney review and to protect the confidentiality of sensitive client documents.

Performed restoration of data from legacy backup tapes and data analysis in conjunction with a Medicare fraud investigation. Conducted analysis to identify instances in which medical procedures were improperly submitted as separate claims to increase the amount of reimbursement from Medicare.

Forensically analyzed multiple computers to determine whether proprietary information and customer lists were transferred without authorization. Determined, based on a metadata analysis of the employee’s recovered USB drive, that the employee had downloaded hundreds of proprietary documents in the weeks leading up to his resignation and subsequently used that information at his new place of employment. Submitted an affidavit in support of a temporary restraining order, which was corroborated by the defendant’s confession under oath.

EDUCATION UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO B.A. Economics and Statistics with General Honors, 2003 TRAINING STROZ FRIEDBERG, LLC, 2003 to Present In-House Training Attend and present at regular in-house training presentations on digital forensics, cyber-crime response, computer security, and network digital forensic tools, and relevant legal topics.

HTCIA INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE, 2010 Attended lectures concerning mobile device forensics and incident response.

SANS INSTITUTE, 2007 Hacker Techniques, Exploits & Incident Handling Attended training course on identifying computer vulnerabilities and responding to computer incidents.

SANS INSTITUTE, 2005 System Forensics, Investigation & Response Attended training concerning digital forensics and incident response covering file system structures, network response, and malicious code review.

GUIDANCE SOFTWARE, INC., 2003 EnCase Intermediate Analysis and Reporting Attended core training course on general digital forensics issues and the use of Guidance Software’s EnCase digital forensic software to analyze electronic data.

CERTIFICATIONS EnCase Certified Forensic Examiner (EnCE) PUBLICATIONS November 2007: Co-authored “Electronic Discovery Behind Enemy Lines: Inspection Of An Adversary’s Network Pursuant To FRCP 34(a)” in Metropolitan Corporate Counsel.

October 2006: Co-authored “Lost Back-up Tapes, Stolen Laptops and Other Tales of Data Breach Woe” in Computer and Internet Lawyer.

September 2005: Co-authored “Electronic Discovery Technology” in Adam Cohen and David Lender’s treatise Electronic Discovery: Law and Practice.

May 2004: Co-authored “Your Company’s Computer System” in E-Discovery: A Guide for Corporate Counsel by Sills Cummins Epstein & Gross P.C.

LECTURES September 2011: Delivered a lecture titled “Cloud Computing Investigations” at the National Forensic Accounting Conference hosted by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

June 2010: Participated in a panel discussion on evidentiary issues regarding social networking websites hosted by the New York City chapter of Women in EDiscovery.

May 2010: Delivered a lecture at the Cyber Security and Applications seminar at Fordham University.

April 2010: Delivered a lecture titled “Web Browsing: Neither Discreet Nor Discrete” at the Computer Forensic Show.

April 2009: Co-presented a lecture titled "Digital Forensics in Business Use: A Case Study in Recovering DNA from a Hard Drive” at the John Jay Center for Cybercrime Studies.

April 2008: Delivered a lecture titled “E-Discovery and IP Theft” to the New York chapter of InfraGard.

May 2007: Co-presented at a seminar for the Business Law Section of the New York State Bar Association titled "Hidden Data: Its Dangers and Traps for the Unwary.” TESTIMONY February 2012: Provided testimony as a digital forensics expert at a spoliation hearing in Alycia Lane v. CBS Broadcasting, Inc., et al., Ct. Com. Pl., Phila. Co., Sept. Term, 2008, No. 03425.

January 2012: Provided trial testimony as a digital forensics expert in Donald G.

Drapkin v. MAFCO Consolidated Group, Inc., 09 Civ. 1285 (PGG) and MacAndrews & Forbes LLC v. Donald G. Drapkin, 09 Civ. 4513 (S.D.N.Y.).

July 2011: Provided deposition testimony as a digital forensics expert in Sartomer USA v. Earl Emerson, et al., CCP, Chester County, No. 10-07708.

May 2010: Provided deposition testimony as a digital forensics expert in Donald G. Drapkin v. MAFCO Consolidated Group, Inc., 09 Civ. 1285 (PGG) and MacAndrews & Forbes LLC v. Donald G. Drapkin, 09 Civ. 4513 (S.D.N.Y.).

June 2007: Testified as a digital forensics expert in U.S. v. Zafar, 06-CR-289 (E.D.N.Y.).

July 2005: Testified as a digital forensics expert in Wall Street Network LTD v. The New York Times Co., et al., Super. Ct. of Cal. (BC 304596).

October 2004: Testified as a digital forensics expert in U.S. v. Bayly, et al., H-03-cr-363 (S.D. Tex.).

June 2004: Testified as a digital forensics expert in Philip Morris USA, Inc. v.

PROFESSIONAL AFFILIATIONS Member, American Statistical Association Member, American Society for Information Science and Technology Member, Association for Computing Machinery 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6532  Fax: 212.981.6545  mmcgowan@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 80 of 102 Exhibit D C.V. of Jason A. Novak Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 81 of 102 JASON A. NOVAK ASSIST ANT DIRECTOR, DIGITAL FO RENSICS PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE STROZ FRIEDBERG Assistant Director, Digital Forensics, January 2012 to Present Senior Digital Forensic Examiner, September 2011 to January 2012 Digital Forensic Examiner, July 2007 to September 2011 Forensic Intern, June 2005 to September 2005; June 2006 to September 2006 Chicago, IL Conduct digital forensic acquisitions and analyses of laptops, desktops, servers, and portable devices in civil litigations, criminal matters, and internal investigations. Consult with clients in matters involving spoliation claims, network intrusions, destruction of data, theft of trade secrets, source code review, electronic discovery remediation, and cybercrime response. Develop customized programs for use in the analysis and processing of electronic data. Carry out large-scale electronic discovery involving the preservation, processing, and production of electronic data. Significant cases include: Conducted source code review of a 802.11 wireless data capture software that was the focus of national and international governmental inquiries. Collaborated on an independent technical report documenting the software’s functionality. Met with domestic and international regulatory authorities to discuss analysis and address questions.

Preserved and analyzed multiple computers, external hard drives, and server logs to detect spoliation, theft of intellectual property, and unauthorized access of servers by a company’s departed employee.

Participated in the design and implementation of an anti-money laundering transaction monitoring database and data analytics on behalf of an international bank in connection with a criminal investigation by the Department of Justice and Federal Reserve. Performed data analysis and helped develop an automated transaction monitoring system.

Acted as neutral Consultant to Special Master with regards to spoliation issues in an antitrust litigation.

Reviewed web event logs to determine the scope of a SQL injection attack and to identify the compromised database records.

Conducted clean room comparison of C++ and Java source code underlying two high frequency trading platforms in a contentious theft of intellectual property litigation.

Diagnosed numerous problems in a third party electronic discovery platform used by a client in response to a Foreign Corrupt Practices Act investigation. Led the re-processing efforts in the Stroz Review platform, concluding with successful production of responsive data to the 32 Avenue of the Americas, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10013 Tel: 212.981.6554  Fax: 212.981.6545  jnovak@strozfriedberg.com  www.strozfriedberg.com Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 82 of 102 JASON A. NOVAK ASSIST ANT DIRECTOR, DIGITAL FO RENSICS Securities and Exchange Commission. Presented Stroz Friedberg methodology to Securities and Exchange Commission as part of the reprocessing of the data.

Developed a program to match electronic stored information as processed by Stroz Discovery to electronic stored information as processed by a third party electronic discovery vendor to move tagging information and attorney work product from the third party electronic discovery vendor’s database to the Stroz Discovery database.

TESTIMONY July 2008: Provided deposition testimony as s digital forensic expert related to alleged spoliation of electronic data in Annabelle K. Garrett, LLC v. Axiom International Investors, LLC, Case No. 3:2007cv01341 (D. Connecticut) EDUCATION UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO B.A. Political Science, minor in Computer Science, 2007 Computer Science Teaching Assistant, Winter 2007 CERTIFICATIONS Encase Certified Forensic Examiner (EnCE), 2010 Guidance Software TRAINING STROZ FRIEDBERG, LLC Internal Training Program Attend weekly in-house training presentations on digital forensics, cybercrime response, computer security, desktop and network forensics tools, and relevant legal topics.

SANS INSTITUTE Reverse-Engineering Malware: Malware Analysis Tools and Techniques, Attended training course on reverse engineering of malicious software (“malware”), including both behavior and code analysis of malware.

EnCase Advanced Computer Forensics, 2007 Attended training course in digital forensic practices and the use of EnCase forensic software, including analysis of NTFS metadata.

Date: Sat, 7 Feb 2004 11:37:13 -0400 Mark, all I can think is your parents have handed you everything your entire life and after all this time and energy and MONEY that you think in your head that an Ok way to act is to just say- oh I've changed my mind I don't think it's cool to make money and that that should be that. Then you have the nerve to suggest that I should pay you more money if I get you right, so that you dont have to try to make money on the site we've built?? It's one thing to say you don't want to sell coffee mugs but I don't see why since the margins are excellent and with minimal effort we could generate some decent revenue for us while keeping the site free to students. It's one thing to say “I'd like to discuss with you other ways we could produce revenue for the site, like advertising, we could sell ads locally I am sure and to places that already sell alumni stuff(but we will be losing the margins) angel investors are just con men and until we have some decent revenue we aren't going to get a dime from them without giving up the whole thing and anyway at this point it's just a freaking harvard thing. I need to be able to get on the actual site and see where we can place some ads and we need to get some bike couriers to go around promoting the site so we can get some people using it FIRST! But we need to get some advertising on the site right away if you like that route better so alumni are used to seeing some ads from the beginning. Isn't there a way to count how many people click to their site from ours? From: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > To: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> Subject: The site.

Date: Fri, 6 Feb 2004 22:12:51 -0400 Paul, Sorry it's taken me a few days to respond, Now that the sites live I feel I must take creative control and I just can not risk injuring my sites reputation by cheapening it with your idea of selling college junk, nor do I wish to spend my time shipping out coffee mugs to rich alumni. The site is cool as it is and I don't care about making any money on it right now, I just want to see if people will use it. If I had the rest of the money I was owed by you for all that extra work I did I wouldn't even need to make money at all on this site. That is money I am entitled to and is rightfully mine.

From: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> To: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > Subject: Re: The site is online! Date: Wed, 4 Feb 2004 10:30:16 -0400 Congrats Mark! The site looks great, Just wondering if we might think of another title for it without the the, but plenty of time for that, I'll try and think of some names, I looked for weeks to finally find streetfax.com and that is how I named it, backwards from the availability, I'm sure you checked to see if just facebook.com was available? you know another thing i've been thinking of that I perfected in Streetfax is going city to city, If you went city to cityh with this I think it would be far easier than just trying to open it up to all ivy league schools at once, actually get on the ground Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 99 of 102 in each place, we send a half dozen guys into the city on bikes and within a few weeks we have photos of every intersection in the place, so the same thing could be done onlyh putting up flyers to promote the site, just brainstorming some ideas on how we can start making some money.

From: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> To: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > Subject: Re: Going live Date: Tues, 3 Feb 2004 07:56:01 -0400 OK fine Mark 50/50 just as long as we start making some money from this thing. I'm looking forward to hearing how it goes but I am so busy right now with a few other projects that my time is very thin.. Let's get it live and open up the store. Have you had a chance to inquire about getting a merchandizing license? We really will need that soon so we can start bringing in some money, everyone buys t shirts and mugs, especially the parents.. they deserve bragging rights at home with the tuition they have to pay. Also what about putting in something like a Christian corner? I've only been to Harvard a few times but the idea of being able to find other christians online without having to do the un PC thing of asking someone face to face sounds to me like it would have some real value, if only the spiritual kind. :-) and the other thing is links to hotlines, why couldnt we have the rape crisis hotline, the suicide hotline, drug rehab and so on right there so when someone really needs something they could link over to the site they wanted? Same thing for local pizza and chinese or whatever, that way it could really be a resource that a person could

I'd like to suggest that you >drop the penalty completely and that we officially return to 50/50 ownership

Case 1:10-cv-00569-RJA -LGF Document 325 Filed 03/26/12 Page 100 of 102 From: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > To: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> Subject: Re: the database Date: Fri, 16 Jan 2004 23:46:53 -0400 I'll check into it and see how easily we could modify the script, I think you are right though and that it could manage people just as well as it manages street interections. I tried your idea and found a similar result can't get the spelling right for an estimated 30% of my names. I also checked out Myspace and you are correct they do not have any programming to account for misspelled names, you simply can't find them! >From: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> >To: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > >Subject: the database >Date: Tues, 13 Jan 2004 08:07:28 -0400 >Mark, I got to thinking, seems like a fantastic idea to use the database we built already, there is really no way >you could rebuild something that could work as well. Think about it and try this, write down on a piece of paper >20 people you remember from high school and try to spell their names correctly. I tried it and at least half of >them I am wondering if I have the spelling right, I'll have to get out my yearbook sometime to prove it. My point >is, what could be better as an engine than my search engine? I just checked out myspace and if you are even >one letter off, guess what? No result, so we have a search engine even better than theirs! Just seems like if we >modify the script a bit we could easily search for peoples names just as we do for street intersections and >return the highest ranking results using the same algorythm and save us some time! From: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > To: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> Subject: Re: an accounting Date: Tues, 6 Jan 2004 16:14:33 -0400 Threats to call my parents are uncalled for and unprofessional and you would be seriously violating our trust by doing so, I have done what I can with the small amount of money you have invested and I will have something live for you to view soon. Again I want to state that under no circumstances do you have my permission to contact my parents as they have nothing to do with my business and just because I am young doesnt mean I'm afraid of my parents response.

Please do not contact them about this issue, they would probably just laugh you off anyway.

From: Mark Elliot Zuckerberg <mzuckerb@fas.harvard.edu > To: paul ceglia <paulceglia@msn.com> Subject: Re: Update Date: Thurs, 1 Jan 2004 17:42:31 -0400 Paul, I'll just get this site online as quickly as I can...

Corrected formatting issue on pages 10 and 11 Confidential Information This Executive Summary of this report shall not be excerpted without prior written permission of Coalfire.

Version 1.1 Executive Summary In September, 2015, CGS, the prime contractor on behalf of Alliance Defending Freedom, engaged Coalfire Systems, Inc., the sub-contractor (hereinafter “Coalfire”) to conduct a computer forensics analysis of certain raw video and audio data files. Coalfire’s objectives for this project are to: Forensically evaluate video and audio files provided by The Center for Medical Progress (“the Organization”) through CGS (“raw” video and audio), and determine whether the raw video or audio content of the files have been edited or otherwise altered; Compare the raw video and audio to certain files posted to YouTube (“Full Footage” videos and a “Supplemental” video) for the purpose of determining inconsistencies between the files.

The scope of Coalfire’s analysis did not cover or include: Validation of those individuals depicted in the video or audio, who recorded the video and audio files, the location where they were recorded, when they were recorded, or the purpose of the recordings; Providing an opinion on the chain of custody prior to receipt of source materials by Coalfire; Coalfire’s analysis was limited to only the source materials received from the Organization and did not include interviews of participants in the videos or audio.

A flash drive containing recorded media was received via FedEx by Coalfire on September 17th, 2015, where it was examined using industry-standard forensic tools and techniques. The flash drive contained (i) a total of ten (10) videos with audio recorded on two (2) separate devices, and (ii) a total of eight (8) audio recordings made with two (2) audioonly devices.

Coalfire’s analysis of the recorded media files contained on the flash drive indicates that the video recordings are authentic and show no evidence of manipulation or editing. This conclusion is supported by the consistency of the video file date and time stamps, the video timecode, as well as the folder and file naming scheme. The uniformity between the footage from the cameras from the two Investigators also support the evidence that the video recordings are authentic.

With regard to the “Full Footage” YouTube videos released by the Organization, edits made to these videos were applied to eliminate non-pertinent footage, including “commuting,” “waiting,” “adjusting recording equipment,” “meals,” or “restroom breaks,” lacking pertinent conversation. Any discrepancies in the chronology of the timecodes are consistent with the intentional removal of this non-pertinent footage as described in this report.

Furthermore, four of the five raw video recordings, which also contained audio captured from the video recording device, are accompanied by a raw audio recording captured from a separate audio-only recording device. The raw audioonly recordings last for the duration of their associated raw videos. These raw audio recordings support the completeness and authenticity of the raw video recordings since they depict the same events within the same duration as captured from the two separate video recorders.

Evidence Acquisition Processing Procedures Coalfire employed industry standard tools and techniques throughout handling, processing, and analysis of the evidence. A sealed FedEx Express envelope was received into Coalfire Labs via FedEx Overnight delivery on September 17, 2015 at 8:35 AM (MST). A Chain of Custody was established upon opening the package. The package contained one USB flash drive sealed in a FedEx label pouch. Details about the enclosed media are included below.

Version 1.1 Device Make/Model Device Serial Number Description Device Serial Number Capacity PNY “Turbo Plus” flash drive 2CE00713QB USB flash drive (silver) USB 3.0 UID: 1C233FA33C1C2A38 128 GB Coalfire used a Logicube Falcon to create a raw DD image of the evidence onto a previously wiped hard drive. The images were verified by their hash values. A working copy of the original image was created onto a previously wiped hard drive. All subsequent analysis was performed on the working copy forensic image, not on the original media or the original forensic image acquisition. The analysis was performed on a dedicated forensic workstation using AccessData’s Forensic Toolkit (FTK) version 5.6.3.16, VLC Player version 2.2.1, Apple QuickTime version 7.7.8, and iZotope RX Advanced.

Analysis File and Folder Analysis There were a total of 29 folders residing on the flash drive. Each of the folders shows a modified, accessed, and created date of 2015-09-13 UTC with the modified and created time stamps between 2015-09-13 03:36:03 UTC and 2015-09-13 04:57:35 UTC. Copying a folder from a source drive to a destination drive results in the creation of a new modified and created date and time stamp on the destination drive. The date and time stamp from the source drive directory does not carry over to the directory created on the destination drive. This suggests that the date and time stamps for the folders located on the flash drive are indicative of when the folders were copied from the original source drive to the flash drive.

The root consisted of 5 directories which are listed below with their creation time and date stamps.

Directory Name Created [root]\052215Dyer dinner 2015-09-13 03:36:47 UTC [root]\072514DebNucatola 2015-09-13 03:36:03 UTC [root]\PPGC040915 2015-09-13 03:36:32 UTC [root]\PPPSGV020615 2015-09-13 03:36:15 UTC [root]\PPRM040715 2015-09-13 03:36:26 UTC Directories contained within the root of the flash drive Within these directories were two subdirectories, each with the name of a male and a female. The male name will hereinafter be referred to as “Investigator 1” and the female name as “Investigator 2.” Within each of these folders were either a subdirectory named “MyRecord” or a folder named with a numeric date. Where there was a “MyRecord” folder present, the “MyRecord” folder contained a subdirectory named by numeric date. The folders named by numeric dates contained recorded video files corresponding to the numeric date of the folder. The five directories in the root listed above delineate five separate dates of video recordings which is explained in further detail below.

The folders named with numeric dates contained video files. In total, there were 86 AVI video files on the flash drive.

The metadata for the AVI video files does not contain any metadata or unique file signatures to indicate the video recording device that was used to create the video. Review of the video content reveals that the video files were captured from two separate video recording devices which are separated into the Investigator 1 and Investigator 2 Version 1.1 directories. The numeric dates within the video file names are consistent throughout all other folder names in the path to any given video file. Examples of the folder and file naming schemes are shown below.

Contrary to folders, the last modified and created date and time stamps of a file is preserved when the parent folder it resides in is copied from a source drive to a destination drive. Therefore, the last modified date and time stamps of the video files contained on the flash drive were preserved from the original source files. The video files residing on the flash drive show last modified and created time stamps between 2015-02-06 20:47:28 UTC to 2014-07-25 22:18:26 UTC.

Review of the video file modified date stamps shows that they are consistent with the numeric dates reflected in the video file names as well as the folders in the path of those video files. Furthermore, the date stamps embedded within the videos themselves are consistent with the date stamps of the folders in the video file path.

An example of the relationship between the video file name and file created date stamp is shown below.

Video File Name Created FNNI0773_20150206130219.AVI 2015-02-06 22:02:18 UTC Video file name and created date stamp relationship The AVI file names also contain a number representing the timecode that is embedded in the first frame of that video file. An example of this is shown below.

Version 1.1 Timeframe count embedded in video Date and time stamps embedded in video First frame from video file [root]\PPGC040915\[Investigator 1]\FNND0569_20150409081515.AVI There were some videos, however, where the first frame does show a timecode that is one second behind the time shown in the video file name.

All of the AVI video files are 1011 MB in size or smaller. When the modified time stamps are in chronological order, it is evident that a new video file is created once the preceding video file size reaches 1011 MB during continuous recording.

This is demonstrated by noting the final timecode embedded in the last frame of the video and comparing it to the timecode in the first frame of the next video in sequence (the first frame timecode number is also contained in the video file name). It is a common feature of video recording devices to capture continuous recording in numerous smaller separate files to avoid issues with file systems that cannot accommodate large file sizes and to minimize data loss in the case of file corruption as result of hardware failure (dead battery, malfunction, etc.). Review of the AVI files that were smaller than 1011 MB appears to be the result of a manual stop performed on the recording device by the camera operator.

Video File Recording Path Continuous Video Recording Segments 052215Dyer dinner072514DebNucatola\[Investigator 1]\MyRecord\20140725 Continuous recording from 2014.07.25 11:48:41 to 2014.07.25 15:18:26 (frame 019233) 072514DebNucatola\[Investigator 2]\MyRecord\20130725 Continuous recording from 2013.07.25 11:41:24 to 2013.07.25 15:15:21 (frame 058664) PPGC040915\[Investigator 1]\20150409 Continuous recording from 2015.04.09 07:18:22 to 2015.04.09 13:09:37 (frame 017915) Continuous recording from 2015.04.09 13:16:58 to 2015.04.09 14:56:40 (frame 025881) Version 1.1 PPGC040915\[Investigator 2]\20150409 Continuous recording from 2015.04.09 07:19:00 to 2015.04.09 13:20:01 (frame 062200) PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 1]\20150206 Continuous recording from 2015.02.06 11:51:07 to 2015.02.06 13:34:49 PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 2]\20150206 Continuous recording from 2015.02.06 11:49:47 to 2015.02.06 13:36:05 (frame 060765) PPRM040715\[Investigator 1]\MyRecord\20150407 Continuous recording from 2015.04.07 08:16:16 to 2015.04.07 13:04:06 (frame 006180) Continuous recording from 2015.04.07 13:05:19 to 2015.04.07 14:31:28 (frame 001483) PPRM040715\[Investigator 2]\MyRecord\20150407 Continuous recording from 2015.04.07 08:16:08 to 2015.04.07 14:12:40 (frame 054178) Continuous video recording segments Based on this evidence presented in this section, Coalfire concludes that the video files located on the flash drive are accurate representations of the raw unedited footage captured by the original video camera with reliable and consistent timecodes.

Video Content Analysis and Comparison The video recordings created by both Investigator 1 and Investigator 2 depict many of the same scenes from two different perspectives as captured by their individual cameras. The timecodes embedded in the video recordings are not synced to each other. Coalfire determined the approximate offsets of the two video cameras for each day of recording.

Video Recording Top Parent Directory Offset of Investigator 2 Camera to Investigator 1 Camera 052215Dyer dinner Approximately +00:00:32 072514DebNucatola Approximately -00:04:03 PPGC040915 Approximately -00:00:50 PPPSGV020615 Approximately -00:00:29 PPRM040715 Approximately -00:00:50 Video Camera Timecode Offset By establishing the offset in timecode, Coalfire was able to compare events from each of the cameras as they happened in real time. This was critical when comparing the raw footage videos contained on the flash drive to the Full Footage videos released by the Center for Medical Progress on YouTube. The Full Footage CMP YouTube videos are listed below and uploaded by the YouTube user “The Center for Medical Progress”.

Full Footage YouTube Video Name YouTube Video URL FULL FOOTAGE: Planned Parenthood VP Says Fetuses May Come Out Intact, Agrees Payments... https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wV2U9unI1NM Version 1.1 FULL FOOTAGE: Planned Parenthood Uses Partial-Birth Abortions to Sell Baby Parts https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H4UjIM9B9KQ FULL FOOTAGE: Intact Fetuses "Just a Matter of Line

Items" for Planned Parenthood TX Mega-Center https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MCiD9_ICt44 FULL FOOTAGE: Second Planned Parenthood Senior Executive Haggles Over Baby Parts Prices https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vwAGsjoorvk Full Footage CMP YouTube videos After these “FULL FOOTAGE” videos were posted, an additional video was posted by the Organization on August 30, 2015 (the “Supplemental Full Footage Video”) that is of the same time duration as missing footage from the “FULL FOOTAGE: Intact Fetuses ‘Just a Matter of Line Items’ for Planned Parenthood TX Mega-Center”.

Supplemental YouTube Video Name YouTube Video URL Part 2 Supplement TX FULL FOOTAGE: Intact Fetuses "Just a Matter of Line Items" for PP https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wV2U9unI1NM Supplemental Full Footage CMP YouTube video Coalfire reviewed any and all inconsistencies in timecode apparent in the Full Footage videos for comparison to the raw video footage corresponding to those videos. Notes were made upon review of the raw video content which described the events that took place during the missing footage that was edited from the Full Footage videos. Events that were left out of the Full Footage videos lacked pertinent conversation. The events depicted in the missing footage fell into five common categories: commuting, waiting, adjusting recording equipment, meals, and restroom breaks. “Commuting” footage consists of Investigator 1 and 2 driving in car to locations, or walking outside to locations outside or inside a building. “Waiting” footage consists of Investigator 1 and 2 waiting to engage with primary Planned Parenthood subject, or other personnel, usually in a lobby, office, or a restaurant table. “Adjusting recording equipment” footage consists of times when Investigator 1 and 2 are manually setting camera or audio recording device equipment, adjusting the equipment, or changing the batteries. “Meal” footage consists of Investigator 1 and 2 eating. “Restroom break” footage consists of Investigator 1 or 2 going to the restroom primarily to relieve themselves.

FULL FOOTAGE: Intact Fetuses "Just a Matter of Line Items" for Planned Parenthood TX Mega-Center Begins 2015.04.09 07:37:48 (034977) Ends 2015.04.09 14:50:13 (014278) Corresponding raw video recordings: PPGC040915 Investigator 1 begins video recording at 07:18:23 and ends video recording at 14:56:40 Investigator 2 beings video recordings at 07:19:00 and ends video recording at 13:20:01 Gap from beginning of raw footage to beginning of Full Footage at 07:37:48 Adjusting recording equipment - Commuting - Waiting Version 1.1 Gap from 07:46:47 to 08:15:15 The 07:46:47 stop coincides with the end of the raw video file named FNND0569_20150409071822.AVI. The next file in the sequence (FNND0569_20150409074648.AVI) starts at 07:46:48 (frame 000000) and ends at 08:15:09 (frame 051046). The next video file in sequence (FNND0569_20150409081515.AVI) starts at 08:15:15 (frame 000000). The missing footage between in the Full Footage YouTube video between 7:46:47 and 8:15:15 matches the time duration of the raw video file FNND0569_20150409074648.AVI.

Coalfire reviewed the content of the Supplemental Full Footage video against the raw video and audio and determined that the supplemental video matches the timeframe, timecodes, and events depicted in the raw video file FNND0569_20150409074648.AVI.

Gap from 08:44:26 to 08:48:39 Restroom break - Waiting Gap from 12:58:43 to 13:50:18 Commuting - Restroom break - Waiting Raw video footage after end of Full Footage video at 14:50:13 Commuting (example follows) Investigator 1 PPGC040915 “commuting” footage video frame Version 1.1 FULL FOOTAGE: Planned Parenthood VP Says Fetuses May Come Out Intact, Agrees Payments...

Being: 2015.04.07 09:10:10 (frame 045843) End: 2015.04.07 14:17:27 (frame 027478) Corresponding raw video recordings: PPRM040715 Investigator 1 begins video recording at 08:16:16 and ends video recording at 14:31:28 Investigator 2 begins video recordings at 08:16:08 and ends video recording at 14:12:40 Gap from beginning of raw footage to beginning of Full Footage at 09:10:10 Adjusting recording equipment - Commuting Gap from 10:27:07 to 11:01:40 Meal - Waiting (example follows) Investigator 1 PPRM040715 “meals” footage video frame Gap from 11:24:49 to 11:27:37 Waiting Gap from 11:36:47 to 11:39:25 Version 1.1 Waiting Gap from 11:41:43 to 11:43:54 Waiting Gap from 12:35:50 to 13:43:46 Restroom break - Adjusting recording equipment - Waiting Gap from 11:45:46 to 12:21:55 Waiting Raw video footage after end of Full Footage video at 14:17:27 Commuting - Waiting - Restroom break FULL FOOTAGE: Planned Parenthood Uses Partial-Birth Abortions to Sell Baby Parts Begin: 2014.07.25 12:17:07 End: 2014.07.25 15:02:33 Corresponding raw video recordings: 072514DebNucatola Investigator 1 begins video recording at 11:48:41 and ends video recording at 15:18:26 Investigator 2 begins video recordings at 11:41:24 and ends video recording at 15:15:21 Timecode and year change from 2014.07.25 14:32:07 to 2013.07.25 14:28:04 Restroom break In the Full Footage video, the video recording starts from Investigator 1. When Investigator 1 excuses himself for the restroom, Investigator 2’s camera is used to follow the conversation at the table. The -00:04:03 offset from Investigator 2’s camera to Investigator 1’s camera explains the jump in time.

The raw video shows that Investigator 1’s camera shows the date stamp 2014.07.25 while Investigator 2’s camera shows the date stamp 2013.07.25.

Version 1.1 Investigator 1 camera Investigator 2 camera The first frame from the footage on 7/25 shows that the date stamps show a one year difference Since the raw video recordings both depict the same events in real time, the discrepancy in the date stamp year is attributed to the two camera’s date and time settings not being synced to each other.

Gap from 14:38:06 to 14:41:08 Restroom break (example follows) Investigator 1 072514DebNucatola “restroom break” footage video frame Version 1.1 Raw video footage after end of Full Footage video (15:02:33) Restroom break - Waiting - Commuting FULL FOOTAGE: Second Planned Parenthood Senior Executive Haggles Over Baby Parts Prices Begin: 2015.02.06 12:03:05 End: 2015.02.06 13:16:13 Corresponding raw video recordings: PPPSGV020615 Investigator 1 begins video recording at 11:51:07 and ends video recording at 13:34:49 Investigator 2 begins video recordings at 11:49:47 and ends video recording at 13:36:05 12:04:53 jumps back to 12:04:24 Restroom break (example follows) Investigator 2 PPPSGV020615 “restroom break” footage video frame Version 1.1 The Full Footage video starts on Investigator 1’s camera who is shown standing up from the table at 12:04:53. The video then switches to Investigator 2’s camera at 12:04:24 which shows Investigator 1 walking from the table towards the restroom. The Full Footage video uses Investigator 2’s camera for the remainder of the video. The time difference is attributed to the -00:00:29 offset of Investigator 2’s camera to Investigator 1’s camera.

Raw video footage after end of Full Footage video (13:16:13) Waiting - Commuting Audio Content Analysis With the exception of the “052215Dyer dinner” directory, each day of video recording was accompanied by MP3 audio recordings within the Investigator 1 and Investigator 2 folders. This resulted in audio recordings from the point of view of both Investigator 1 and Investigator 2 that are separate from the audio captured by the video recording device. Like the video recordings, the audio files contained a numeric date in the file name. An example of one of the audio recording file paths is shown below.

Audio File with Path Created [root]\PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 1]\150206_001.MP3 2015-02-06 21:52:37 UTC This MP3 audio recording exhibits a file name containing the date 2/6/2015 which is consistent with the numeric dates in the names of the other folders and files contained in the top level parent directory. The creation date of this file is also consistent with the date contained in the names of the files and folders contained within the top parent directory.

The metadata embedded in the header of the hexadecimal data reveals that this audio recording was captured with a Sony IC Recorder model ICD-UX-533. The metadata also reflects the date the recording was created which is consistent with the file date stamp.

Sony flash voice recorder model ICDUX533 Sony IC Recorder MP3 MP3 metadata audio recording file date stamp Metadata from [root]\PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 1]\150206_001.MP3 Audio File The audio recordings were started shortly before or after their corresponding video recordings and span the duration of the video recordings or more. Below is a chart with details about the audio recording.

Version 1.1 Audio File with Path Created Duration [root]\072514DebNucatola\[Investigator 1]\140725_002.MP3 2014-07-25 18:47:00 UTC 03:28:28 [root]\072514DebNucatola\[Investigator 2]\140725_001.MP3 2014-07-25 18:40:41 UTC 03:31:59 [root]\PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 1]\150206_001.MP3 2015-02-06 21:52:37 UTC 01:47:20 [root]\PPPSGV020615\[Investigator 2]\150206_001.MP3 2015-02-06 20:47:28 UTC 01:46:08 [root]\PPRM040715\[Investigator 1]\150407_001.MP3 2015-04-07 15:16:50 UTC 06:16:22 [root]\PPRM040715\[Investigator 2]\150407_001.MP3 2015-04-07 15:20:16 UTC 06:16:49 [root]\PPGC040915\[Investigator 1]\150409_001.MP3 2015-04-09 14:20:20 UTC 0:7:39:57 [root]\PPGC040915\[Investigator 2]\150409_001.MP3 2015-04-09 14:21:53 UTC 07:41:43 MP3 Audio Recording Files Much like the footage from the two separate cameras, Coalfire was able to time align the audio recordings to the video footage to allow for review of any inconsistencies or anomalies in their content with both the video and audio recordings from the two video cameras.

Version 1.1 OFFICIAL USE ONLY OFFICIAL USE ONLY [Agency] Case #: DIGITAL EVIDENCE FORENSIC REPORT Your Logo Here Your address here CASE INFORMATION: Agency Case #: Originating Agency Case #: [removed] #: [removed] #: Remedy#: Distribution: [removed]    [removed]    [removed]    IT    [removed]    Internal Audit    Emp. Relations    CI     Other: Date/Time Report Completed: Date/Time Incident Occurred: Type of Report: INVOLVED: Involved Witness Complainant Mentioned Name: Last: First: Title: Mailstop: Email: Cell Phone: Work Phone: Employee #: Involved Witness Complainant Mentioned Name: Last: First: Title: Mailstop: Email: Cell Phone: Work Phone: Employee #: Involved Witness Complainant Mentioned Name: Last: First: Title: Mailstop: Email: Cell Phone: Work Phone: Employee #: CLASSIFICATION LEVEL HERE May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) exemption number and category: 7, Law Enforcement Department of Name of Agency review required before public release Name/Org: Your name/org	Date: Guidance (if applicable): CLASSIFICATION LEVEL HERE May be exempt from public release under the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552) exemption number and category: 7, Law Enforcement Department of Name of Agency review required before public release Name/Org: Your name/org	Date: Guidance (if applicable): SUMMARY: EVIDENCE SUBMITTED:

Item # SOFTWARE UTILIZED All software utilized in this examination is fully licensed and registered to [Agency Name] or its agents.  All software and forensic hardware has been validated pursuant to [Agency Name] policies and procedures.

Item #1 - Can be described as [insert photo here] [insert photo here] [insert photo here] [insert photo here] HASH OF ORIGINAL EVIDENCE The original media was connected to a forensic hardware write blocker (asset tag #) and the write blocker connected to a forensic computer (asset tag #).  Prior to doing anything with the original media, the media was hashed to obtain a baseline hash value.  This allows the hash value of the original media to later be compared to the hash value of the forensic image created of the original media.  By comparing the hash values of the original media and that of the forensic image, the forensic image can be authenticated as an exact duplicate copy of the original evidence.

The hash values obtained from the original evidence were as follows: SHA1: Other: FORENSIC IMAGING After obtaining the hash value(s) of the original media, a forensic image was created.  The forensic image was placed on a: Government owned, forensically wiped hard drive Government owned, forensically wiped Storage Area Network (SAN) The forensic imaging software utilized in this process creates an imaging report, detailing the hash value(s) of the newly created forensic image.  The hash value(s) of the forensic image was compared to the original hash value obtained prior to imaging the device.  The hash value(s) of the forensic image: Matched exactly the hash value(s) of the original media.

Did not match the original hash value(s) of the media.  If checked, provide explanation below.

VIRUS AND MALWARE The original media was scanned for malware.  Prior to the scan, all malware definitions were updated.  The results were: No malware detected.

DRIVE GEOMETRY BIOS EXAMINATION Once the hard drive was removed, the computer was turned on and the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) checked.  The following was found: The date and time were accurate.

The date was accurate, but the time was inaccurate.  List time offset from correct time: The time was accurate, but the date was inaccurate.  List date offset from correct date: Forensic computer was adjusted to compensate for any time differences.

Other: FORENSIC EXAMINATION OF FILES DISPOSITION EVIDENCE DISPOSITION FORENSIC EXAMINER’S CONCLUSION DISPOSITION ATTACHMENTS APPROVALS Report Author Digital Signature:				Report Approver Digital Signature: [insert scanned signature here] Insert Name Insert Title Page 2 of 4 OFFICIAL USE ONLY Page 1 of 1 OFFICIAL USE ONLY Forensic Notebook (w/ edits)

NOTE: Older versions of a Forensic Note may exist as a result of changes made by the owner of the note. If the current Forensic Note has older existing versions, the NoteID and Timestamp information of the older Forensic Note will be provided. If required, the older Forensic Notes are available within the ZIP archive package downloaded with this Forensic Notebook.

Potential Relevant Information Additional notes may have been created since this Forensic Notebook (w/ edits) PDF was generated on 2017-10-11 @ 09:12:50 (UTC -8) . The Validation URL listed on the next page will indicate if additional notes exist.

Contemporaneous Notebook (edits allowed) - Ver 1.2 Notebook Overview FORENSIC NOTEBOOK (W/ EDITS) INFORMATION Summary as of 2017-10-11 @ 09:12 (UTC -8) Owner: Det. BROWN Notebook Type: Notebook ID: Number of Notes: First Note Created: Last Note Created: Number of Attachments: Number of Edited Notes: Contemporaneous Notebook (edits allowed) adad3fd0-180f-4a7b-9c58-62d04bd2688d 2017-07-09 @ 18:03 (UTC -8) 2017-07-09 @ 20:58 (UTC -8) Notebook Created: Forensic Notebook (w/ edits) PDF Generated: 2017-07-09 @ 07:45 (UTC -8) 2017-10-11 @ 09:12 (UTC -8) Forensic Notes - Summary Information Pages The Notes on the following Forensic Note Summary pages are an exact copy of the original content entered by the owner of this notebook. If required, each Forensic Note Summary can be compared to the original Forensic Note digitally signed and timestamped at the time of creation.

Validating the Authenticity of this Document (if required) If the authenticity of this Forensic Notebook (w/ edits) is in question, it can be validated by going to the following URL: https://www.ForensicNotes.com/Validate System Generated Files The SHA-512 Hash value of this saved PDF document will be sent to a Trusted Timestamp Authority (TSA) which will generate an RFC 3161 Timestamp. The Timestamp will be returned within a .p7s file which contains this PDF’s SHA-512 value, RFC 3161 Timestamp and an x.509 Public Key Certificate.

Contemporaneous Notebook (edits allowed) - Ver 1.2 Notebook Overview NOTES Sunday - July 09, 2017 (2017-07-09) 17:54 (UTC -8) NoteID: 3038a1ed-f961-4629-98ac-8f55ece4f5b2 (1) Older versions of this Forensic Note exist: NoteID: ee861d83-1e07-46b8-a52a-e9002e97eebf Timestamp: 2017-07-09 @ 20:58 (UTC -8) Timestamp: 2017-07-09 @ 18:03 (UTC -8) Exhibit #1, began examination of device in the digital forensic faraday room. Exhibit was a white iPhone 6 stored in a sealed RF shielded can.

Open the sealed RF can and removed the exhibit and began to take exhibit photos.

Powered on exhibit #1, battery had low charge. Connected device to power source to charge battery.

Contemporaneous Notebook (edits allowed) - Ver 1.2 Notebook Overview 18:05 (UTC -8) NoteID: 70835fa0-1479-4198-b16c-3a6096a974ba (5) Timestamp: 2017-07-09 @ 18:08 (UTC -8) All applications that were of relevance appeared to be successfully extracted.

Included Call Logs, Instant Messages Images and Videos Advised Det. JONES to identify any information of relevance.

Contemporaneous Notebook (edits allowed) - Ver 1.2 Notebook Overview Global Information Assurance Certification Paper Copyright SANS Institute Author Retains Full Rights This paper is taken from the GIAC directory of certified professionals. Reposting is not permited without express written permission.

Interested in learning more? Check out the list of upcoming events offering "Advanced Incident Response, Threat Hunting, and Digital Forensics (Forensics 508 at http://www.giac.org/registration/gcfa

Submitted on 14 January 2005 for the GIAC Certification program for Computer Forensics (Track 8 Assignment Version 1.5)

The two parts selected for completion: In scenario analysis of the Floppy Disk image (obtained from GIAC Web site).

Table of Contents Abstract Report on the Forensic Analysis of a recovered Floppy Disk

Background The Forensic Workstation Backing up the disk AntiVirus Scan of the disk image Creation of the Working Copy The Initial Analysis Working with Autopsy Creating a File Activity Timeline Detailed Analysis

The Software found and possibly used by Leszczynski IT Forensic Analysis of an abandoned computer and its Hard Disk

Keyposition fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 Legal

Background Legal Implications of using the abandoned computer Basic Analysis Investigation Objectives Detailed Analysis Why did the system fail? AntiVirus, Trojan and Malware Scans System ownership and why this happened Legal issues Summary of events and supposition by the investigator Conclusions and points learnt Table of Items (tables, command outputs and screen captures) References Abstract This document is submitted as the practical part of the GCIA Certified Forensic Analyst program (GCFA)1.

This practical is in two parts, the first of which required an image of a floppy disk to be analysed and a report submitted based upon the contents. During this part of the practical, the investigator discovered traces of a steganographic program (Camouflage.exe). The conclusion being that the owner and holder of the disk had attempted to export company data via this hidden means.

The second part of the practical required the analysis of a system that had been compromised. Due to difficulties obtaining such a system, approval was given for the author to analyse an abandoned pc bought from a refuse disposal facility (thus the investigator had no knowledge as to the contents of the drive, its purpose or the intent of the user).

During the second phase of this practical the contents of the abandoned system’s hard drive was examined to glean the user’s role, their style and skill in operating the system. An examination of the drive for illegal or inappropriate data/content was conducted and a comment made as to the possible breaches of UK or International laws. Finally, the drive’s owner is identified from the contents of the hard disk, and their recent activities and actions traced.

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 The conclusion draws the problems and complexities of the whole process together and identifies how a lack of user knowledge resulted in a system being brought to its knees with Spyware before, in an effort to protect it, the user rendered it inoperable by the installed of defensive software.

On 27 April 2004, the forensic investigator was tasked by Mr Keen to conduct an analysis of a floppy disk recovered from a Robert John Leszczynski, Jr., who was employed by Ballard Industries, as the lead process control engineer for the project to design a new fuel cell battery.

The floppy disk was recovered by a security guard who seized it from the above RJ Leszczynski at 1645 on 24 April 2004. The disk had been in Leszczynski’s briefcase, but this was in breach of the Company Security Policy and therefore the guard impounded the disk, forwarding it to Mr Keen to Security Administrator.

The Security Administrator was mindful for the ongoing investigation into customer drift and information leakage and request a full analysis of the disks contents.

The only item of evidence submitted or analysis was a single Floppy Disk. The disk received was identified and described as:

Description 3.5 inch TDK floppy disk Serial Number of item: Tag# fl-260404-RJL1 MD5 Hash of Disk d7641eb4da871d980adbe4d371eda2ad Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46

The forensic workstation image was re-ghosted to the laptop and all respective security and reliability patches applied. The workstation used was a Dell [Dell] Inspiron 5100 with removable hard disk caddies containing:

All products were updated remotely via removable media and therefore, had never been connected to the internet; thus they can be judged to be forensically and operationally sound in that they will represent accurately all data they process and display. The image of the laptop has been retained for future use and reference should it be required.

Autopsy (v1.70) and The Sleuth Kit were then loaded to perform various analyses on the image and files within. Due to some compiling issues with The Sleuth Kit v1.72 (TSK), the newer version (v2.03) of Autopsy could not be loaded onto the Forensics System (lib failure with Fedora Core 2 (FC2)). TSK is a collection of command line tools that have been adapted and modified from their original release in the form of ‘The Coroner’s Toolkit7 (TCT). Autopsy is a graphical front end to TSK that uses perl to interprets the user’s actions and builds the TSK commands in the background.

The user interface is via a standard web browser but output is graphical with logs, recovered files, md5 hashes, timeline output etc being stored in a user definable mounted file structure. All these tools are available from <www.sleuthkit.org>.

These programs (Autopsy and The Sleuth Kit) are reputable open source Forensics tools, that themselves have both been subjected to Forensics Analysis to ensure they do not alter or corrupt data being analysed. The output from the Autopsy is in the form of test files that are stored in a folder designated by the initial investigator.

These test files are created and md5 hashes performed on each as they are written to the HDD. The md5 hash is stored with the output and then the output is displayed for the investigator. All output listed in this report will be using the text saved by Autopsy (unless otherwise stated). Screen shots included will be of the web interface used by the investigator. Additionally, were command line interface (CLI) instructions, programs or commands are used their output will be reproduced in this report with information on the platform and OS the command was issued from or to.

A copy of the recovered floppy disk image was made and an MD5 Sum performed on the image. This MD5 sum was compared with the original and found to be an exact match, indicating

The original disk was then placed in an envelope marked with the details above and the md5 sum of the disk at the time of sealing. The envelope was then sealed and all joints signed by the investigator and the Security Administrator, with all signed parts then covered with anti-tamper tape. The disk was then placed in the fire proof a humidity controlled safe. The investigator has had no access to the disk, envelope or safe since they were secured. The working image of the disk was labelled:

Item 2 - Label details for the Master Working Disk (image) Description File name of image MD5 Hash of image v1_5.gz Image of floppy disk tagged Tag# fl-260404-RJL1 V1_5.gz D7641eb4da871d980adbe4d371eda2ad The file (Linux), md5 (Linux) and fsum8 (Windows) commands were run on the image to confirm it had retained its floppy disk properties despite being imaged.

Item 3 - file (Linux) Command Output of v1_5.gz Command file v1_5.gz /root/v1_5.gz: x86 boot sector, code offset 0x3c, OEM-ID " mkdosfs", root entries 224, sectors 2872 (volumes <=32 MB) , sectors/FAT 9, serial number 0x408bed14, label: "RJL ", FAT (12 bit) Output

Item 4 - md5 (Linux) Command Output of v1_5.gz Command Output Md5 v1_5.gz d7641eb4da871d980adbe4d371eda2ad /root/v1_5.gz

To prove the md5 software was correct and functioning correctly the same file was hashed on the windows system.

AntiVirus Scan of the disk image The disk was subject to an AntiVirus Scan using Norton AV, which was updated moments before the scan being run. It was therefore considered that the image did not contain any viruses known at the time of the scan (that were detectable).

Item 6 - Screenshot of Norton AV (Windows) Completing Scan of v1_5.gz Creation of the Working Copy A copy was then taken of the image file and the “Master Working” image placed in a separate folder. All activities were conducted on the “Working Copy”. If the working copy had become corrupt at any point new version could be made form the Master Working. At every stage MD5 Sums were taken and compared to the sum on the original label. All hashes for the Master Working, Working Copy and the documented floppy disk, were exactly the same.

The disk image was made read only in the Linux OS [chmod 444 v1_5.gz] and thus any activity and investigation conducted by the investigator could not have affected the disk image. As a precaution once the investigation was complete a final md5 hash was conducted and it confirmed that the image had not been altered during the analysis.

Having started Autopsy, the image was mounted and the file contents were checked and listed. The screenshot below shows the file index of the floppy disk.

Of note are the two deleted files on the disk namely: “_ndex.htm” and “_AMSHELL.DLL”. Md5 hashes were taken of the live files and this was saved as “md5_of_std_files_on_RJL.txt” (listed below).

Output Autopsy output of md5 request on visible files MD5 Values for files in v1_5.gz 99c5dec518b142bd945e8d7d2fad2004 e0c43ef38884662f5f27d93098e1c607 b9387272b11aea86b60a487fbdc1b336 ac34c6177ebdcaf4adc41f0e181be1bc 5b38d1ac1f94285db2d2246d28fd07e8 f785ba1d99888e68f45dabeddb0b4541 Information_Sensitivity_Policy.doc (INFORM~1.DOC) Internal_Lab_Security_Policy1.doc (INTERN~1.DOC) Internal_Lab_Security_Policy.doc (INTERN~2.DOC) Password_Policy.doc (PASSWO~1.DOC) Remote_Access_Policy.doc (REMOTE~1.DOC) Acceptable_Encryption_Policy.doc (ACCEPT~1.DOC) Creating a File Activity Timeline

Next a file timeline was created from all Allocated and Unallocated space on the drive including the Unallocated Meta Data structures. This would show the order in which files were created, modified and deleted. The file was created by Autopsy and as the ‘output/body’ file was created an md5 hash of the file was also written to the working folder (/forensics/floppy/FloppyDisk/). The final step for this item was to create the time-line file from the body with a start and end point. As Floppy disk contained small amounts of data a complete timeline was requested and this was saved as ‘output/total-timeline’.

The timeline would be later analysed and referred to as a key reference document, indicating file activity and user actions. As the timeline related to a floppy disk the activity recorded would primarily be that of the user as systems are rarely able to page or record system activity to the media (limited volume size, slow read and write speed coupled with a lack of system pre-notification as to its removal)

FDB5 DE3D 307935 .a.998D -/-rwxrwxrwx 33423 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 42496 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 36864 .a.

Creating a String File A ‘String File’ is the output of a search of any string of 4 or more characters in row.

In other words it is a file of all the groups of characters that may be words. This Strings File can then be examined to gain insight into the contents of the originally searched file or disk structure. This file can be searched using the likes of grep or any text string search utility (even find in notepad).

Having obtained a file list, string file and file activity timeline, initial analysis could occur. This resulted in list of the files on the floppy disk being made and an examination of their size, contents and potential use being listed. The following is a list if the files observed as being ‘live’ on the disk:

Notes A large file that outlined the password policy A large file that outlined the remote access policy A small file that outlined the internal lab policy A small file on the policy on Information sensitivity A small file that outlined the Encryption policy

File Name Password_Policy.doc Remote_Access_Policy.doc Internal_Lab_Security_Policy.doc Information_Sensitivity_Policy.doc Acceptable_Encryption_Policy.do

While the accuracy of the documents in relation to the current company policies is not something that the investigator would comment upon, the first 2 files listed above were deemed larger that expected given their limited textual content. These files were recorded as being ‘of interest’ and would be subjected to closer examination later.

An examination was then made of the files that had been marked as deleted, this included a CamShell.dll (probably a part of a program) and _ndex.htm (probably an ‘Index.htm’ page from a website). The time-line shows a file was deleted on 3rd Feb 2001 and that file was the CamShell.dll. A search of the internet revealed a handful of newsgroups that referred to an old and now unsupported program called Camouflage. Further searches led the investigator to this web site located at the URL: <http://camouflage.unfiction.com>9 (pictured below).

The download link was followed and the self-expanding-executable-zipped file Camou121.exe was obtained and hashed.

The zipped file was expanded on a control system and the contents examined. The following image shows the file contained in the self executing zip file. It is worth remembering that the zip folder also contains the installation software that will build the application and create the uninstall file to facilitate its ‘safe’ removal. Once the setup.exe file is execute the application is built with the majority of the application being installed in the user defined folder (by default this is ‘C:\Program Files\Camouflage’).

The installation process was allowed to continue and the built application is detailed below:

The contents of the Password_Policy.doc and Remote_Access_Policy.doc files that were unusually large and whose size was not proportionate to their contents.

The Camouflage program installed the CamShell.dll file into the installation directory specified (in this case we accepted the default): C:/Program Files/Camouflage

And this also includes the executable and a Readme.txt and an Uninstall data file.

Item 16 - fsum (Windows) for files created by the Camouflage install process fsum camouflage > dir_list_camouflage_folder.txt ; SlavaSoft Optimizing Checksum Utility fsum 2.0 <www.slavasoft.com> ; Generated on 12/07/04 at 13:30:39 Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5*Camouflage.exe 06E4 A169 4E46 9f08258a80d578a0f1cc38fe4c2aebb5 4e986ab0909d2946bed868b5f896906f *CamShell.dll 0c25ad7792d555b6c8c37c77ceb9e224 *Readme.txt 2902261874a65a2581f0a260fad6a9df *Uninst.isu

Running the Camouflage program revealed a Settings GUI and initially this appeared to be the only impact of the installation:

A quick read of the Readme.txt file gleaned the advisory that the use of notepad.exe could compromise the presence of the encrypted data as it would display all data.

This opening with notepad was performed on all live files on the floppy disk and as thought the Password_Policy.doc and Remote_Access_Policy.doc did seem to have encrypted within their file sectors.

To test theory the Camouflage program was run for against the Password_Policy.doc file. To do this the file was selected and the right click or alternate menu brought up. Selecting the “Uncamouflage” option the following window appeared:

This did present a problem as to this point no passwords had been recovered, either in text files on in the form of an obvious file or text in a file on the disk.

Passwords The investigator then tried a few default passwords, starting with “password” which was rejected. The next one tried was “Password” this was the correct password as the image below shows the contents of the Camouflaged file.

Note how the 1st line of text on both screen shots shows the carrier files on the floppy disk were created by v1.2.1 of the program (or so the program believes).

The “Password” was then tried on the other potential carrier file but it was not accepted. At this point the investigator was slightly stumped and began to examine the strings file for the FD to glean any possible password. After some time and after trying several dozen passwords gold was struck. It closer examination indicated that the password for the Password_Policy.doc file was the first part of the file name, thus “Remote” was tried on the Remote_Access_Policy.doc file and the following files were revealed to inside the carrier.

The having opened the CAT.mdb file in notepad.exe the string: “M S y s A c c e s s O b j e c t s LTD” Indicated the file was a MS Access11 file and opening it in MS Access revealed the following:

Item 22 - Table of CAB.mdb extracted from Remote_Access_Policy.doc Which appears by the title of the table to be a Client database, possibly clients of the Ballard Inc?

File Timings Explained Before explaining what the investigator believes occurred, it is worth explaining the somewhat unusual timings that are often connected to files that have been copied to new media (as happened in this case).

Operating Systems. Operating Systems that are POSIX and E2 complaint record time stamps on files when they are Modified, Accessed or Created (called MAC times). Some like many UNIX flavours (inc Linux) apply stamps time stamps on all activity (unless prohibited by the tool accessing the file).

Microsoft Windows however, will stamp full time and date information on creation and modification but only date information on file access occurrences (the access time being stored else where).

File copying. File copying can create some strange timings as only the files creation time and date are updated. Therefore, it is possible to make a new file on 1st Nov, access it on the 2nd Nov, modify it on the 3rd Nov and copy it onto separate media on the 4th; when the MACs are viewed on the 5th however, it will appear to have been accessed and modified before it was created.

As will be explained in the next section, when a carrier file was modified to include a different file, the modification time was set; when the carrier file was copied to the floppy drive, it was given a creation time that was after the modification time. To confuse matters more the carrier file was made using a program that retained the MAC times of the original carried files. Thus when the carried files are exported from the carrier file a new instance is written to the new media and although this will have a different creation time again, it will retain the original accessed and modification times.

Having examined the data obtained from various sources and parts of the disk, the following is offered as a possible explanation of what has been found:

Before 23 April 2004, a Mr Robert John Leszczynski, Jr., who was employed by Ballard Industries as the lead process control engineer for the project to design a new fuel cell battery. Mr RJ Leszczynski, it is believed, brought a program (Camouflage) Ballard reasons KeySteganographic fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 into

This program may have been brought in file by file to prevent detection, as the CamShell.dll file had deleted been on floppy disk until it was deleted.

The program was probably installed on a Ballard Ind. PC and this could be confirmed by scanning all systems to which Leszczynski would have had access, looking for the CamShell.dll file or remnants of it having been there.

The Camouflage program was used to hide 4 files for transportation out of the company grounds. The files being 2 graphical pictures and 1 an image of a report, the 4th file was a MS database of what appears to be clients’ details.

Fortunately the Camouflage program stores the original MAC times from the files as can be seen in items 20 and 21.

Once the Camouflage program had been used to make carrier files out of the Password_Policy.doc and Remote_Assess_Policy.doc files [believed to be 23 Apr 2004 @ 1155 & 1154 hours respectively].

These carrier files and four other word documents (policy documents from Ballard Ind.) were copied onto the Floppy disk [believed to be 26 Apr 2004 @ 0946 hours]. These files accessed at some point on 26 Apr 2004, but as Microsoft does note record access times, only dates, specific data is not available.

As Mr RJ Leszczynski, went to leave the building at the end of the day he was stopped and the disk impounded. As the disk is logically labelled with his initials and he was in possession of it when stopped, it is suggested that Mr RJ Leszczynski was exporting information that he had access to, to outside the boundary of Ballard Ind. However, analysis of his work pc would reveal more information about his activities, and it is recommended that this is undertaken before it is used/switched on again.

Item 24 - List of all files (inc those hidden) found of the floppy disk File name / description Clear or hidden and by

Acceptable_Encryption_Policy.doc Clear Internal_Lab_Security_Policy1.doc Clear Internal_Lab_Security_Policy.doc Clear Information_Sensitivity_Policy.doc Clear Password_Policy.doc Clear

It is not possible to state if Mr RJ Leszczynski had transferred data out of the organisation on occasions or if this was the first attempt, however, examination of his work host PC may reveal details of the date and time the Camouflage software was installed.

The Software found and possibly used by Leszczynski The program found on the disk went by the name of Camouflage. It is a Steganographic Program that hides user selected data inside carrier files. The following is a quote from a mirror of the old Camouflage web site12: “What is Camouflage? Camouflage allows you to hide files by scrambling them and then attaching them to the file of your choice. This camouflaged file then looks and behaves like a normal file, and can be stored, used or emailed without attracting attention. For example, you could create a picture file that looks and behaves exactly like any other picture file but contains hidden encrypted files, or you could hide a file inside a Word document that would not attract attention if discovered. Such files can later be safely extracted. For additional security you can password your camouflaged file. This password will be required when extracting the files within. You can even camouflage files within camouflaged files. Camouflage was written for use with Windows 95, Windows 98, Windows ME, Windows NT and Windows 2000, and is simple to install and use.”

An attempt to recreate the image made by Mr R J Leszczynski failed in that the md5 hashes of the output file are not the same. That said it is unlikely that they would as the files would be different given the different MAC times that would accompany the files that are inserted, see below:

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 Post Incident Activities Given the severity of the incident the following activities are recommended to by undertaken in priority order:

Impound Mr R J Leszczynski’s PC and any other system on which he had unfettered access (without powering it on) and have it Forensically Analysed. The hashes from items 13, 16 and 23 should be searched for on the imaged drives (having performed a deep or recursive hash of all files on his HDD; this will confirm or otherwise the presence of pre or post camouflaged files.

Prevent Mr R J Leszczynski from having any access to his or any Company system, all of his accounts should be frozen immediately and any current sessions terminated immediately; in case he tries to destroy evidence.

Obtain legal advice (from the Company’s lawyers) on the possibilities of seeking legal recompense for Mr R J Leszczynski’s actions.

Perform a sweep of the network for the Camshell.dll file and impound any system reporting its presence.

Seek an Search Order under Section 7 of the Civil Procedure Act 1997 (formerly an ‘Anton Piller Order’ after the case of the same name), and search and sieze his home pc and any media that may contain the exported data. Depending on the outcome of the search and subsequent forensic analysis of the media, sue the individual for theft of Intellectual Property and breach of IRP.

Perform a re-education programme on the IT and Security policies affecting the use of corporate and personal IT for the processing of Ballard Ind. data.

Write to the manager of the security guard whose excellent actions resulted in this leakage of data being stopped.

As suggested above, although there has been no Criminal Law breach, the Corporate Espionage that appears to have been conducted can be addressed through the UK civil courts. Furthermore, this procedure carries less risk for the Company and achieves results considerably quicker. Having consulted with several UK IT Security lawyers it was confirmed that a Criminal case can take upto 18 months from the incident to appear in court. Additionally, the incident is turned over to the UK Police, who conduct the investigation as best they can with shifting priorities and reducing resources.

The civil court route places the responsibility in the Company’s hands as they choose their investigators and legal team. The lawyers consulted spoke of cases taking less then 4 months from incident to the court case and the aware of damages.

Furthermore, the weight of argument required in a civilian court is less as ‘the Balance or probabilities’ as apposed to ‘Beyond all reasonable doubt’ in a criminal court.

As to breaching Ballard’s own Policies, the position is not clear cut there either: Acceptable Encryption Policy The Camouflage program is Steganographic and therefore only hides the data it does not encrypt it, therefore the Acceptable Encryption Policy has not been breached.

Here the subject could claim they were not aware of the sensitivity of the data he exported; however, this is unlikely to stand up to the balance of probabilities (remembering he had probably worked there for some time as he was the lead engineer) and there was no accident to the hiding and passwording of these files.

Therefore it is suggested that Mr R J Leszczynski is in breach of paragraph 3.3 on this policy:

Note: any of these markings may be used with the additional annotation of "3rd Party Confidential". To indicate that Ballard Industries Confidential information is very sensitive, you may should label the Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27

Access: Only those individuals (Ballard Industries employees and non-employees) designated with approved access and signed non-disclosure agreements.

Distribution within Bright Industries: Delivered direct - signature required, envelopes stamped confidential, or approved electronic file transmission methods.

Distribution outside of Ballard Industries internal mail: Delivered direct; signature required; approved private carriers.

Electronic distribution: No restrictions to approved recipients within Bright Industries, but it is highly recommended that all information be strongly encrypted.

Storage: Individual access controls are very highly recommended for electronic information. Physical security is generally used, and information should be stored in a physically secured computer.

Disposal/Destruction: Strongly Encouraged: In specially marked disposal bins on Ballard Industries premises; electronic data should be expunged/cleared. Reliably erase or physically destroy media.

Penalty for deliberate or inadvertent disclosure: Up to and including termination, possible civil and/or criminal prosecution to the full extent of the law.

The Password, Remote Access and Lab Internal Security policies have no bearing on this matter.

In summary Mr R J Leszczynski has beached the company policy on Information Sensitivity, and given it was on the disk with which he caused the breach, he cannot argue that he was not aware of it either (double whammy!). It would be for the civilian court process to decide on the level of damages that could be awarded following a successful case, but before that is undertaken the search and seizure of the media at Mr R J Leszczynski’s private address should be undertaken to ensure that data is returned to the data owner and that the full extent of his activities are declared to the courts.

WinZip (version #8.1) Camouflage (version #1.2.1) Describes the type and composition of a file Performs an MD5 sum hash of a file Performs an MD5 sum hash of a file For virus sweeping of found files For analysis of the recovered disk Autopsy uses Perl scripts to run the various Sleuth Kit commands Used to view and control Autopsy Lists files Examine zip files without executing The steganographic program examined and believed to have been used by subject disk’s owner

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 IT Forensic Analysis of an abandoned computer and its Hard Disk Background

On the 31st of August 2004, while depositing some refuse at the local tip a computer was found discarded. Inquiries with the local operative revealed that the system had been left there the previous day. Without opening the system up, a payment of £3 (approx ~$5) was requested from the site manage, as contribution to their ‘tea fund’. Later investigations revealed the system to be an excellent purchase as can be seen:

Intel Pentium III operating at 600Mhz.but no memory (RAM) 1 x 50 speed CD ROM Onboard sound card Network card 1 x 6.4 Gb Integrated Disk Electronics (IDE) Hard Disk Drive (HDD)

The system was the removed from the facility and returned to an examination area (investigators garage)where it was catalogued and photographed. Notice the electrical safety check record (dated 16 April 02 to expire 16 April 03) hinting to a production system as apposed to a home use one ; additionally the tower case from this manufacturer ‘Epic PCs’14 also suggests the use was not a personal one.

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 The side, HDD and Floppy drive removed the system was again photographed to show age, serial numbers and general condition (notice the almost total lack of dusk on all parts displayed).

Investigation Serial number : REC/SJA/01Aug04/HDD1 Description : Fujitsu ATA Hard Disk Model No MPE3064AT Serial No 01334622

The system as discovered minus the HDD was described and catalogued as: Case and Motherboard testing

Investigation Serial number : REC/SJA/01Aug04/BaseUnit_1 Description: Epic tower system with CDROM, graphics card, FDD, PSU and NIC. With the 2nd 5½ Drive bay empty and both its and the 3rd bays front missing.

The rest of the system was inspected for water or damage and with the drive Key fingerprint = AF19 2F94to998D

The BOIS time was incorrect and was approx 62 minutes fast (see the picture below)

The BIOS date on the system was incorrect as motherboard date was the 3 Aug 2004 when in actual fact the picture below was taken on Tuesday 31st August 2004 ie the date is out by 28 days!.

The time and date discrepancy observed was not expected and was contrary to the general condition of the system and this hinted of either: A lack of use (or synchronisation with an internet clock) BIOS Battery failure - but as the right month and year were still held this was discounted.

The user must not have noticed or has deliberately changed the time and date for a particular reason.

BIOS battery was low or the system had been stored in a cold environment) failure as most mother boards alert the user to this fact, and a check with a exhausted confirmed this motherboard to do so.

Furthermore, any time error expected would have been in the other direction ie that the British Summer Time (BST) clock adjustment had not been applied (BST calls for the clock to advance 1 hour in Spring and retard 1 hour in October). The date error perplexed the investigator but he hoped that information gathered later would shed light on this matter, in the mean time, all dates and times would be treated with suspicion.

The function test of the remaining system complete it was sealed and stored in the locker of the garage. Meanwhile the HDD was prepared for imaging. The Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 photograph below shows the hard disk installed in an external caddie ready to be connected to the Forensic Laptop (under it).

Item 31 - The external IDE caddie with the abandoned drive fitted Forensic Laptop Specification

The forensic Laptop used for this examination was a Dell Inspiron 5100. The specification of the laptop being; Intel Pentium 4 2800 MHz with 768Mb RAM, a CDR/RW and 3com on board network card. The graphics processor was a 64 mb Mobile ATI card with a 1024x768 TFT screen. It boasts a IEEE 1394 port as well as 2 x USB 2 ports. This laptop has more than proven itself in the past and the performance of each of the components has been well above standard without the need for specialist drivers. It will accept over 15 different distributions of Linux and has run Windows from 95 - 2003 Enterprise Server. As the caddie cost in the region of £30 (~$55), the Main Forensic OS was a free distribution(FC2) and the laptop (inc 2 extra HDD and internal caddie drives) cost £550 (~$1030) the whole forensic outfit was comparatively cheep £580 ($1085).

The only glitch that was presented was with the use of the external caddie which connects IDE devices to either IEEE 1394 or USB2. While MS Windows was able to address the device, Fedora Core 2 did not have any support for it in the kernel.

That said some research on the internet did reveal a patch had been submitted (see below) which when applied allowed the external caddie to be mounted in the Fedora Core 2 (FC2) OS in read only mode.

I send a patch and copy of /proc/bus/usb/devices for my 5`25 external USB enclosure. I don't know exactly manufacturer of this device, but model is CD-509.

It will be nice if it helps somebody else. http://www.linuxhq.com/kernel/changelog/v2.6/1/ Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46

Note Write support for NTFS is very limited see cutting below from the Linux-NTFS sourceforge.net web site16.

Not really, but if you only need to copy files from Linux to Windows on a dual-boot machine, see "How to write to NTFS" below for a possible way to work around the lack of write support. For write support in Linux, read on.

There are two drivers, currently. The original driver, in 2.4 has some write code in it, but it is extremely dangerous to use it. The possibility of destroying your filesystem is very high.

Legal Implications of using the abandoned computer Given the circumstances under which the system was acquired, it is worth recounting the legal position the author is in regarding the ownership of the system.

Section 5(1) of the Theft Act 1968 provides a legal defence to the finder of items of property that the owner has abandoned:

Item 34 - Legal defence for Theft 5. Belonging to another (1) Property shall be regarded as belonging to any person having possession or control of it, or having in it any proprietary right or interest (not being an equitable interest arising only from an agreement to transfer or grant an interest).

If property is genuinely and honestly abandoned then it cannot be theft because it belongs to no one.

However, as the item was effectively given to the site for disposal it is their property and thus the £3 payment can be considered sufficient given that the condition of the system was not known and that it had been left outside in the rain overnight.

The fact that the system had been left at a refuse tip led the author to believe that the owner had abandoned his rights of ownership of the hardware. This is a legal position under Section 2 of the Theft Act 1968, which allow anyone to claim ownership of the property if they believe the owner has given up the ownership of the property.

Content that the system had been legitimately acquired, analysis could commence.

The Hard disk was installed into the external caddie and connected to the USB port of the investigators patched laptop. The Linux dd command was used to copy portions of the /dev directory in an attempt to identify which directory the drive had been mounted to. This had proved in the investigators experience to be the best method as the /dev directory used by the kernel varied between devices and USB ports. The procedure involved using dd with the syntax below: #/ dd if=/dev/sda of=/tmp/mount_test1 This was executed and allowed to run for several seconds before being interrupted and the output file being examined with vi. If the output file was blank a different /dev/ folder would b selected. Success was often being achieved within 2 guesses.

Once the correct directory was identified a dcfldd18 command was executed to image the whole drive.

The dcfldd command (written by the Defence Computer Forensics Laboratory as indicated by the ‘dcfl’ bit inform of the dd) was used image process as it is an improvement over the native dd command. The labs basically modified the native dd command so it performs an MD5 hash of the HDD as it images it (in the above screenshot it is the ‘hashlog’) and it also displays the counters showing the progress of the execution.

Once the whole disk image had been performed an md5 hash was taken of the source drive and this was compared with dcfldd hashlog. As these were found to be exactly the same the investigator has assumed the image file to be a bit-for-bit copy of the /dev/sda drive. The image of the drive that then obtained file was made read only (using the chmod 444 <image_file> command). To prevent any file handling errors from disrupting the investigation, the image file was copied to a different folder /root/datavault to allow copies to be made should a working copy be corrupted in any way. Once copied to the second location, an md5 hash was taken and stored in a separate file in the /root/datavault. This hash matched the original image file and the source drive itself and would serve as a reference should any one wish to confirm the authenticity of any file used or obtained during this investigation.

The file command was used in an effort to identify the contents of the file. The

Next the process is repeated for the first partition on the drive which was mounted in the /dev/sda1 directory. The md5 hash, copying to the /root/datavault, chmod and file process was again repeated and the file command was used to examine the contents. This time the output was:

Item 36 - Output from the file command Unknowndcfldd_hdd_sda1_dd: x86 boot sector, code offset0x58, OEM-ID “MSWIN4.1”, sectors/cluster 8, Media descriptor 0xf8, heads 255, hidden sectors 63, sectors 12659157 (volumes > 32 MB) , FAT (32 bit), sectors/FAT 12342, reserved3 0x800000, serial number 0x1c12160a, unlabeled A look at the Microsoft web site19 decoded the MSWIN4.1 as:

Item 37 - Quote from Microsoft explaining the HDD ID Tag You might also see the OEM ID "MSWIN4.0" on disks formatted by Windows 95 and "MSWIN4.1" on disks formatted by Windows 95 OEM Service Release 2 (OSR2), Windows 98, and Windows Me. Windows XP Professional does not use the OEM ID field in the boot sector except for verifying NTFS volumes.

Therefore, it is assumed that the hard disk was formatted with either Windows 95 (OSR2), Windows 98 or Windows ME. Whilst it is not impossible for this to be a production system, this latest fact would more than hint to a personal user.

With the image marked as read-only in the Linux file permissions, the image was mounted as a loop-back read only device in the /mnt/unknown directory. This was to allow the investigator see for the first time the directory structure.

Additionally, as both the mount command and the Linux file permissions were set to read-only, browsing could be undertaken without fear of altering the data.

Item 38 - First look at the imaged file structure Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 do not hide entries starting with . print octal escapes for non graphic characters use a long list format but do not list group

A cursory examination of this the root of the system, would confirm the file identification of the early personal edition of Windows. Files like the autoexec.bat and config.sys are not used on windows NT (any version) and the FAT32 file structure was not readable by NT. In order that we might learn the install date of the operating system the ls command was executed with the ‘ -abo ’ switches. These have the effect of displaying (taken from the ls manual): This produced the following output:

Item 39 - Initial look at file ownership and their associated creation times/dates

It is a known fact that Windows 9x and ME used fixed dates for the creation times and dates for its system files, directories and applications installed from the CDROM. However, as the OS is installed on the disk the new directories created as a result of the OS operation will be given the local, natural, real time and date settings (assuming the end user set the time and time zone correctly). Therefore, is can be assumed that the OS was installed on 2nd February 2004 given the data associated with the ‘Windows’, ‘My Documents’, ‘Program Files’ directories and the stamps on the setuplogs.old, setup.txt and system.1st files.

While some time and date errors have been found, the windows process of requesting the user to set the correct date, time and time zone are at this point Key fingerprint = AF19

Finally, vi is used to display the contents of the command.com file as this would be used to start a command shell and MS Windows OS always reports the host OS at the top of any new shell. The screenshot below confirms the presence of a Windows 9820 installation.

Item 40 - Windows version extracted from the shell Before concluding the basic analysis, an assessment of the role the system operated under before disposal was conducted. The key factors in this are the files and directory structure, the OS, the systems hardware and the manner and style of disposal. The assessment is split into factors for the business use and factors for the private use.

Electrical Safety Check sticker on the case, would indicate a Health and Safety requirement for the system owner to ensure the user’s system is safe to use. The investigator had never heard of any one having such tests performed on home electrical appliances (due to cost).

The case was very clean inside indicating either regular and thorough cleaning or the fact the system was in an air conditioned environment.

The age of the operating system (6 years) would indicate it was a outright purchase and not on contract for regular or frequent updating.

The system was a reasonable specification and in business would most likely have been reused for some other task as it met the min spec for Windows 2000 Professional, Windows 2003 Server and XP Pro (or home).

However, given the current specification of home systems is would be considered dated and limited.

The Team17 folder would indicate the presence of a game (as Team17 install their games to these folders eg Worms), unlikely (but not impossible) it to be used onFA27 a business system.

The system appears to be both and it is therefore believed it was indeed used for business purposes up to some time after 16 April 2002 when the electrical safety check was performed.

It was then possibly transferred to a home user where most recently on the 2nd February 2004 Windows 98 was installed.

Key areas and direction for Detailed Analysis It is important when performing any detailed task to have both objectives and direction otherwise time and effort can be wasted proving points that are not relevant or of value to the investigation. The following will be used to direct investigation and data recovery during the next stage. The success and performance of the forensic examination and analysis will be gauged against these objectives.

Investigation Objectives System Objectives - (Identify) Operating System Current OS Previous OS Last booted / shutdown (date and time) User Objectives - (Identify) The common and or last user Owner (physical and email addresses) IP Address of the last user General User activity Hidden software Objectives Locate and identify any Viruses Locate and identify any Spyware Locate and identify any Malware Locate and identify any Trojans Legal Objectives Identify any illegal activity Identify any illegal software Comments if identifiable Comments

The detailed analysis commenced with the starting of the Autopsy (v1.70) and mounting of the disk images to the software. Autopsy given the investigator the option to adjust the time zone and mount time of the files to reflect minor discrepancies in the clock of the system. This would mainly be used when several systems are being compared and all times need to be accurate to an external Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 reference. As this was the only system being analysed, it was not necessary and the time zone was set only to Greenwich Mean Time and British Summer Time (GMTBST).

Once mounted the system was subject to an md5 hash and this was compared to that of the original dcfldd hashoutput. Next the file browser window was opened and a general examination of the contents of the drive was conducted. The date and time that the %systemroot%/win386.swp held should have indicated the last point at which the OS conducted any swap operations. Swap operations are where data in memory is ‘paged’ or ‘swapped’ to the hard disk. This is used to allow the multitasking of the OS to be undertaken when it has insufficient RAM to host itself, the drivers and the applications.

In a typical Windows system the OS consumed up to 60% of the available RAM so the swap file was in regular use. When shut down, the swap file is one of the last files accessed and closed and as a result it is usually a good indication of the last time the system was used ie 15th July 2004 @ 1937 hours (GMTBST). However, the file picture directly above the win386.swp is the win.ini file, which is used store the configuration of the OS (only Win 9x and ME used this feature as the registry is used by NT, 2000, XP and 2003), and this file has a date of 17th August 2004! So a full time line analysis will be conducted on the information extracted via Autopsy.

The creation of the time line was the next objective. This would show the creation, modification and access times (MAC) for all current files. It would also obtain from the meta data the MACs for the files that have been deleted, this is less accurate as the meta data deteriorates when parts of the disk are reused. However, as we believe the system was a home PC that may have been used by a business, some remnants of the old data or data2F94 structures may DE3D remain.

A169 4E46 interface was directed to create the time line and the output analysed in a text reader (as the web browser is not ideal and cannot handle long documents very well).

As can be seen above the time line revealed some very confusing data, especially given the assumption that the system was not used after 15 Jul 2004 when the windows swap file was last accessed. Although, the clock was believed to be inaccurate (being out by approximately 27 days and 62 minutes), some MACs claimed creating and access dates in the 1930s! This may be attributable to meta data being corrupt as few computers will allow their clock to be set so far in the past.

Ignoring the 1930s data, the last entry is the c:\scandisk.log which has a time stamp of 22nd August 2004 11:55 and 16 seconds. An examination of the log itself reveals the entry which matches the timestamp. Interestingly though, the scandisk.log file was created on 2nd Feb 2004 - the believed built date for the OS., however, the first scan recorded is on 11th Aug 2004 (and this was cancelled) only indicating a developing problem that required more and more attention from the user. Below is a summary of the scandisk.log file that has had the extra carriage returns removed and where a scan revealed no problem the text was removed.

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 ******************* Microsoft ScanDisk for Windows NOTE: If you use an MS-DOS program to view this file, some of the characters may appear incorrectly. Use a Windows program such as Notepad instead.

ScanDisk used the following options: Thorough test Automatically fix errors Drive (C:) contained the following errors: ScanDisk was canceled.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: system Log file generated at 05:15PM on Tuesday, August 17, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:44PM on Tuesday, August 17, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:55PM on Tuesday, August 17, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 08:23PM on Tuesday, August 17, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 03:57PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 03:58PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 04:00PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 04:03PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:27PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:37PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:42PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 06:10PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 09:57PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 10:22PM on Thursday, August 19, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for FA27 problems, theFDB5 following results: Log file generated at 01:46PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 01:48PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 01:52PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 01:58PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 03:48PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 05:08PM on Friday, August 20, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 06:37AM on Saturday, August 21, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 08:25AM on Sunday, August 22, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: Log file generated at 10:55AM on Sunday, August 22, 2004.

ScanDisk checked drive C for problems, with the following results: File system File system 06E4system

File system What is apparent is that the first check was requested/required by either the user of the system (upon boot), on 11 Aug 2004 then over the next 11 days a further 23 scans were imitated. This would indicate a failing of either the physical disk, the operating system or the presence of some software that was causing the system to crash, whereupon reboot a scandisk would automatically be invoked (and conducted unless cancelled by the user).

Item 44 - MAC for the boot.log Tue Aug 17 2004 17:26:30 55277 m.. -/-r-xr-xr-x 0 c:\/BOOTLOG.TXT

This hints strongly of a system that is failing and was operational for the last time on 17 Aug 2004. This with the scandisk.log file (above) suggests the user would attempt to booth the system (generally in the evening) and allowing it to conduct several scans in an effort to correct whatever problem prevents normal system operation. The scans do not appear to correct the problem and user gives up after 35 attempts.

It is the assumption of the investigator that the user gives up on 22 August 2004, believing the disk to be corrupt elects to scrap the system some time over the next week.

Given the fact that the investigator was able to image the hard disk without any problems, it is surmised that the errors on the disk were software related. With this in mind the investigator looked for recent software installations that may have corrupted the logical integrity of the operating system on the hard disk.

Large numbers of files downloaded with a peer-2-peer software; there are traces of 4 such programs: Kazaa Lite21 <http://www.kazaalite.nl/en> (c:\Program Files Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46

MorpheusUltra24 <http://www.grokster.com> (c:\Program Files) (c:\Program <http://www.morpheusultra.com> (c:\softwrap)

Peer-2-peer software is a classic method of catching viruses, downloading Trojans and other Malware or Spyware.

In order that a Windows Spyware and Antivirus program could be loaded and run against the image, it was necessary to mount the dd image on a samba shared folder and to sweep the files remotely. First the mount command was used to mount the image onto the /mnt/windows_forensic_server directory which samba had been configured serve via Windows SMB file sharing protocol. Access was restricted to a the sole Windows system to be used to conduct further analysis.

Although the image file itself is read only, the mount point is also defined as being read only.

The Laptop applied samba share level permissions to the Administrator of the Windows XP desktop. This intern was connected via a separate network card with a different address to a switch. The switch allowed access to the Green Interface on the Smoothwall26 <www.smoothwall.org> Internet Firewall. The internet connection was enabled on the XP Pro system when an item required researching on the Internet, otherwise it was disabled. To reach the image from the internet, an attacker would be required to defeat the Smoothwall Firewall, identify the internal NATed address range, defeat the Norton Personal Firewall installed on the XP Pro system, enable IP Forwarding or install Windows Internet Connection Sharing (ICS), identify the IP Address of the Linux system and defeat the OS firewall installed.

Therefore the investigator considered the read only samba shared data to reasonably safe - although as mentioned the connection to the Internet was limited and tightly controlled.

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 The purpose of the samba share was to allow the use of windows based tools (with which the investigator was more familiar). Upon connecting to the read only network share, a complete copy of the contents was taken to a temporary directory E:\GIAC SANS TEMP\. This was in case any of the Trojan hunting software tried to remove or alter the data. Although the data was safe, AntiVirus and Anti Malware software have a bad habit of freezing when they attempted to delete data that was prohibited by more than the system’s own file permissions. Note as standard practice, all products were updated moments before being used on the target image.

AntiVirus, Trojan and Malware Scans The investigator recognised that the fact that only complete files were visible and that any viruses etc held in slack or unused space would not be found by searching through samba shared data, he believed there would be sufficient to be going on, furthermore, a full slack and deleted file search would be conducted on the host Linux system.

The first a Virus Scan was performed using Norton Anti Virus a good produce that the investigator is familiar with, it is configurable and it will detect Trojans, Viruses, Worms and {as we will see only some} Malware. On this occasion it revealed one virus called ‘polmx2.cab’ which it classed as a Trojan.

A check of the complete timeline revealed the Trojan was created on the disk and modified on the times shown below:

Item 48 - Creation and modification MACs for ‘POLMX2.CAB’ Trojan Key fingerprint = AF19 2F94 998D DE3Dc:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.cab F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46(POLMX2.CAB) 42036 FA27 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 0FDB5 1188717 Fri Jun 18 2004 16:09:22 Fri Jun 18 2004 16:09:26 357 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 37888 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 Tue Jun 22 2004 00:00:00 42036 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 357 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 4096 .a. d/drwxrwxrwx 0 1188723 1188729 1188717 c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.cab (POLMX2.CAB) 1903505 c:\/WINDOWS/INF/POLMX2.INF 26855989 c:\/MYDOCU~1/2003_0~1/New Folder 357 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 37888 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 4096 .a. d/drwxrwxrwx 0 1188723 c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.inf (POLMX2.INF) 3223257 c:\/WINDOWS/POLMX2.EXE 26855991 c:\/MYDOCU~1/2003_0~1/New 37888 .a. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0

Folder(1)(NEWFOL~2) 1188729 c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.inf (POLMX2.INF) c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.exe (POLMX2.EXE) c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/polmx2.exe (POLMX2.EXE)

The second Virus scan (its always a good idea to do at least two), was performed by the Free AVG Antivirus28 tool <http://www.grisoft.com> this revealed a significantly larger number, 32! Although this may be because of the overlap in what AVG, Norton and Spyware Doctor29 all scan for.

Next up was a scan for Spyware, this was conducted using the PCtools Spyware Doctor (www.pctools.com/spyware-doctor). If the Norton result was bad, the Spyware doctor result was horrendous, as it discovered 85 instances of Spyware or Trojans.

The user became aware of the number of item of Spyware to the point where they took action and removed something critical.

The system simply failed under then number of malicious item of software running.

Or both, in that the system caused so many problems that the user took action and the software used caused the system to fail by either removing an infected file that was critical to the OS or by failing to install itself properly and corrupting the system partition in the process.

An examination of the time line in the last few days gives some hint as which it these is the case. Some items have been highlighted in the next portion of the time line: The red indicate the presence of a malicious file or Trojan.

The Trojan installed is call (by Trendmicro.com) TROJ_RVP.d and the screen shot shows the files it installs, all of which can be seen in the time line.

The time line shows that just 5 minutes later the user attempted to install a defensive piece of software in the form of ‘Spyblocker’ from <www.spyblockersoftware.com> , this can be seen from the time line entries coloured blue, that relate to the installation and modification of 6 files, as referred to in the installation report on the company’s web site31:

Item 52 - Installation report for Sypblocker http://www.spyblocker-software.com/spyblocker/instrpt.htm Installation Report: GP-Install Generated by InCtrl5, version 1.0.0.0 Install program: C:\trysb\spyblock.exe 3/22/2002 12:34 AM <cut for brevity>

Files changed: 6 c:\dialer\PACKET.DAT Old date: 3/22/2002 12:26 AM New date: 3/22/2002 12:33 AM Old size: 111 bytes New size: 117 bytes c:\WINDOWS\GPInstall.exe Old date: 1/1/2002 12:39 PM New date: 3/22/2002 12:27 AM Old size: 796,672 bytes New size: 796,672 bytes c:\WINDOWS\POWERPNT.INI Old date: 3/19/2002 12:02 PM New date: 3/22/2002 12:28 AM Old size: 60 bytes New size: 60 bytes c:\WINDOWS\SYSTEM.INI Old date: 3/19/2002 5:14 PM New date: 3/22/2002 12:28 AM Old size: 2,206 bytes New size: 2,206 bytes c:\WINDOWS\WAVEMIX.INI Old date: 3/19/2002 12:02 PM New date: 3/22/2002 12:28 AM Old size: 54 bytes New size: 54 bytes c:\WINDOWS\APPLOG\APPLOG.ind OldKey date: 3/22/2002 12:20 fingerprint = AF19 FA27AM 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 New date: 3/22/2002 12:27 AM Old size: 10,151 bytes New size: 10,215 bytes

However, the install does not go well and the installation process is not completed, as the next files modified are boot process ones suggesting that the install crashes the system, possible through conflict with any one of a number of Trojans.

Tue Aug 17 2004 17:16:08 Tue Aug 17 2004 17:16:10 (TTFCACHE) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:16:38 Tue Aug 17 2004 17:26:30

The reb dotted line indicates a point after which the disk records become so garbled that they fail to make any sense. The investigator believes the exhaustive number

Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:56 Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 (XAUPDA~1.HTM) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:58 46472 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 46472 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 46472 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 (OPTIMI~1.EXE) 10 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 (XAUPDA~1.HTM) 2 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 (XAUPDA~1.HTM) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:09:00 46472 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 (OPTIMI~1.EXE) 10 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 (XAUPDA~1.HTM) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:09:04 4845004 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 4845004 ..c -rwxrwxrwx 0 61 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 259198 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 4845004 ..c -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 Tue Aug 17 2004 17:09:06 61 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 Tue Aug 17 2004 17:09:08 4845004 m.. -/-rwxrwxrwx 0 4845004 m..

Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:42 (WINDOW~1.JOB) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:44 (WINDOW~1.JOB) Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:46 -/-r-xr-xr-x -/-rwxrwxrwx -/-rwxrwxrwx -/-rwxrwxrwx -rwxrwxrwx -rwxrwxrwx -/-rwxrwxrwx -/-rwxrwxrwx -/-rwxrwxrwx

Tue Aug 17 2004 17:08:26 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 1188846 1188831 1188846 1188831 1188831 1188846 c:\/PROGRA~1/ZANGO/zango_kyf.dat.tmp (_ANGO_~1.TMP) (deleted) <unknowndcfldd_hdd_sda1_dd-_ANGO_~1.TMP-dead-30360210> c:\/WINDOWS/wininit.ini (WININIT.BAK) c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/ft22s.exe (FT22S.EXE) c:\/PROGRA~1/ZANGO/zango_kyf.dat (ZANGO_~1.DAT) c:\/WINDOWS/wininit.ini (WININIT.BAK) c:\/PROGRA~1/ZANGO/zango_kyf.dat.tmp (_ANGO_~1.TMP) (deleted) <unknowndcfldd_hdd_sda1_dd-_ANGO_~1.TMP-dead-30360210> c:\/PROGRA~1/ZANGO/zango_kyf.dat (ZANGO_~1.DAT) c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/ft22s.exe (FT22S.EXE) c:\/PROGRA~1/COMMON~1/JAVA/Xcpy1.cfg (XCPY1.CFG) c:\/PROGRA~1/XML c:\/PROGRA~1/XML/XML.dll (XML.DLL) c:\/PROGRA~1/XML c:\/WINDOWS/WIN.INI c:\/WINDOWS/TEMPOR~1/CONTENT.IE5/FHJGH453/updall2m[1].exe c:\/WINDOWS/TEMP/t9312.TMP (_9312.TMP) (deleted) <unknowndcfldd_hdd_sda1_dd-_9311.TMP-dead-1188831> <unknowndcfldd_hdd_sda1_dd-_9312.TMP-dead-1188846>

System ownership and why this happened Having identified why the system was abandoned, the investigator turned his attention to the other information that could be obtained from the system as to its usage, the owner and the type of use the system was put to. Note this aspect of the report is heavily sanitised.

The first and main point of call when examining a windows system is the registry.

The registry in Windows 98 was quit embryonic when compared to the likes of Windows XP, with its separate user logons, separate data storage area and even separate software installs and permissions. When Microsoft was designing Windows 98 they assumed the person sat in front of the system was authorised to see and access all data. In modern IT Security terms it was a dedicated operating system. As a result there is no ability to discern the particular users at any set time other than by their actual activity and behaviour. There is no logon security on Windows 98, the login process it simply for network shares and to prevent other users seeing each others desktops (laughable as there was no file security from preventing them from navigating to the files and desktop directory once ‘logged on’.

User activity on this system is split into several areas: General Family type stuff - saving and printing digital pictures.

Playing computer games - ‘Worms’, ‘The Land before time’ and ‘Totally Spies’ (free from UK McDonalds during summer 2004)

Many of the Spyware programs conducted a social engineering attack and the user seems to have been duped into installing them. A classic example being the Internet Optimizer itself a browser hijacker32 (see <http://www.2-spyware.com/browser-hijackers-removal> The fact that they were connected to the internet via broadband and using peer-to-peer software without either a personal firewall or AntiVirus protection.

The user was relatively new to computing and did not really understand much of what was going on. For example: By the 8th August 2004 they appear to have become annoyed with the popups their Spyware was generating and they installed popup stopper. But given the number of items of Spyware and the fact that many had been legitimately installed (having duped the user), this had little chance of stopping the problem, furthermore, they were only treating the symptoms and not the cause.

Looking at the [HKEY_Local_MACHINE] keys can reveal numerous parts of the machines history, although on this occasion, the IP address is not recorded as it is allocated on boot and Windows 98 had a notoriously flaky TCP/IP stack.

As was outlined earlier, the fact that the OS does not distinguish between users means the likes of a types url list has little value, to the assessment but again does shed light on the user’s activities:

The only points that jump out from the above list are that the investigator hopes the user didn’t use this system for online banking with Lloydstsb as several of the Spyware and Trojans installed were capable of keystroke logging. And it is a shame they didn’t stop longer at the Zonelabs site, even the free personal firewall would have been useful.

The last command execute key in the registry can be useful if the user has actually ruin some commands, but in this point and click age, few do. In this the key only points to the ‘Worms Blast’ game that used to be installed.

The Windows Media Player was the default player for wma and avi files, there was a separate player installed for DivX files. The XXXX is where a pornographic file name was removed by the investigator. Notice where these files came from, their source directory would indicate they were downloaded via the peer-to-peer file sharing program Grokster (http://www.grokster.com/).

Item 58 - Windows Media Player recent file list [HKEY_USERS\.DEFAULT\Software\Microsoft\MediaPlayer\Player\RecentFileList] "File0"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\Sam Cooke - Stand By Me (Original).mp3" "File1"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\Elvis Presley - I Did It My Way.mp3" "File2"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.mpg" "File3"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.wmv" "File4"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.wmv" "File5"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.asf" "File6"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.mpg" "File7"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.wmv" "File8"="C:\\Program Files\\Grokster\\My Shared Folder\\XXXX.wmv" The username was initially hard to identify as the user did not use the bundled Microsoft email client - outlook express. Instead they used the instant messenger software installed. However, the registry came up trumps as the user completed a registration process. (The exact name has been removed under the GIAC conditions).

If that hadn’t worked the cookies were the next stop. Oh and notice the dell cookie on the 13 August 2004, it connects (time wise) to some images in the Internet Explorer History directory they show Dell 2400 desktop system 33 - wonder if the user was getting frustrated with their slow and dated operating system that was creaking under all the additional program running. These were drawn together in a search for all text files, as the investigator looked for logs etc, notice again how the numbers of log files and other text files modified and created comes to a grinding halt in 2 days.

DE3D found F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 602F94 - Text998D files FDB5 and Cookies There was only one IP address found in on the system in the live area, that of (the X’s are for GIAC rules compliance) IP: 92.7X.1X5.X9, and this was drawn from a GPRS software log. However, research on the internet revealed it to have been a restricted range indicating it to have been internal to the provider. It is been partially removed as internal addresses of this kind are generally unique to the user and/or provider.

The question as to whether the use conducted any illegal activity can be a difficult one to answer as it can depend on many things. The pornography for example is explicit but as to its breach of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 & 64 (OPA) the investigator turned to the Internet Watch Foundation <www.ifw.org.uk> for advice.

Obscene Publications Act 1959 & 1964 <http://www.iwf.org.uk/police/page.22.38.htm>

As a guide it could include images featuring acts of extreme sexual activity such as bestiality, necrophilia, rape or torture.

Key fingerprint = AF19 FA27 2F94 998D FDB5 DE3D F8B5 06E4 A169 4E46 This act makes it an offence to publish, whether for gain or not, any article whose effect, taken as a whole, is such, in the view of the court, to tend to "deprave and corrupt" those likely to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.

Although the names of the pornography video files did include on several occasions the words rape, the belief is that many are either ‘staged’ or simply advertising tricks to increase hits. Note - this was professional advice obtained by the investigator from persons employed in these types of investigations. Apparently, this is a common renaming trick used by site owners to increase the size of their libraries and to maintain customer interest. Detailed analysis of these files was not performed.

There were also 30 music files and music videos, mainly of Elvis. They type and quality of these indicates they were originally released by one of the major recording labels. Their presence on the hard disk itself in not sufficient to prove they were illegally obtained however, they are in two locations: C:\My Shared C:\Program Files\Grokster\My Shared Folder With online music purchasing increasing exponentially in the UK, the user may have an external device or other system where they legally acquire the files.

However, it is the belief of the investigator that given the other files in these folders (ie pornography) which are unlikely to be ‘purchased’ these music videos were also downloaded via the peer-to-peer software especially as there were 4 different types of peer-to-peer applications.

However, this is currently a topical subject both in the USA and Europe with USA based companies using USA legislation against non US citizens outside the US and as such, the acceptable levels and applicability of these laws and procedures have yet to be determined.

By searching the unallocated parts of the disk, the following information was obtained (the process is described but all detail is excluded under GIAC rules :

Telephone number: By searching for the area code of the city where the refuse facility is located a 1337 entries were found, these piped into more were scanned visually in 30 seconds and the partial number was then used as the basis for another search, this time revealing the complete number.

House Number, postal address and post code: Right next to one of the telephone numbers cashed from a web form. user’s=name: Nero2F94 Registration andDE3D confirmed by theA169 1300+ other KeyMain fingerprint AF19 FA27 998D FDB5 F8B5 06E4

Other contacts know by main user: Several in Outlook Express identity files ( C;\windows\Application Data\Identities\{7D345F00-559211D8-B270-90928CAF6A4C}\Microsoft\Outlook Express)

Summary of events and supposition by the investigator The following is the summary of the events; the system was built in February 2004, with Windows 98 OSR2. It was used mainly by one individual, probably male who occasionally allowed others to access games or the internet. The user was not security orientated or particularly computer literate as much of the problem stemmed from the lack of basic internet security devices ie a Firewall and AntiVirus (although from this investigation not even Norton could have helped him). The user elected to install several ‘free’ internet accelerators and dubious software touting to be popup stoppers etc.

The installation of several peer-to-peer program facilitated the increase in downloaded software of dubious sources and the volume of pornography installed on the system hints to broadband being installed - there is a reference to NTL broadband medic in the unallocated space but much of this data is corrupt. The user seems to have become aware of the Spyware as a popup blocker is installed and a few weeks later the installation of Spyware-blocker is seemingly started, however possibly due to so many files being infected and corrupted or hardware failure, the system crashed during the install and despite attempts over several days the system is never again operational.

It was noted that the user had considered purchasing a new machine as several references to Dell <www.dell.co.uk> were seen in the cache and the Internet Explorer history points to the commencement or at least pricing of a Dell Dimension 2400.

When the system finally fails to boot on 22 August 2004 the user makes the decision to dispose of it. They remove the memory and, judging by the software and media players installed (one from X-Men2 and Nero Burning ROM), a DVDR/CDRW 51/2” device (see the images at the start). Then either believing that no data can be recovered or not knowing about data forensics, the case is then dumped at the local refuse facility, where the investigator spots it the next day.

The failure of the hard disk - either its hardware or its logical structure did present significant problems for the forensic investigator. Furthermore, using a system obtained in this manner was a risk, as the disk may have been completely clean, well maintained ie with little meat for the report or loaded with child pornography or images of that nature.

As it was, the system proved to be a even more of a challenge than originally expected as the numerous items of Malware, the failing structure and 23 scandisk executions all added to the tangled web of corrupt data and misleading facts. The fact that the BIOS clock was significantly out of sync with GMT also didn’t help.

This system was an easy target for Malware and viruses as it had everything going for it; no antivirus software, no firewall, numerous peer-to-peer applications and several browser hijacking programs (and an uneducated user). The system lasted just under 9 months but given the sites and user activity it did well to last that long, especially as much of the problem was user installed under a social engineering attack aimed to trick them to thinking they would fit their problems.

Personal Statement: I was honestly saddened by the death of this system, a strange but true comment. I believe that over the course of the investigation I have gotten to know this system well, as I discovered its habits and foibles. The process of investigating the reason for its disposal was an interesting journey that had me slowly piece the gruesome facts about the demise of this operating system. I was horrified when I approached the time line entries for 17 August 2004 as they pointed to the scandisk logs that in simple black and white showed how the system had not managed to reboot and correct itself despite numerous attempts - like watching someone drowning I suppose. Ironically, the fatal blow seems to have come from a piece of software designed to remove and protect the system from the numerous items of Spyware and Trojans that it housed.

User Objectives - (Identify) The common and or last user Owner (physical and email addresses) IP Address of the last user Static IP not printed in clear in this report Completed

HDD Errors prevented any meaningful data being extracted Several versions obtained, almost depends on what is called a boot and what makes a shutdown Comments Not printed in this report Not printed in this report

A169 4E46 Yes several scans using different H2 fingerprint Locate =and identify any2F94 Spyware products

Item 39 - Initial look at file ownership and their associated creation times/dates

Item 62 - Quote from the Internet Watch Foundation “GIAC Certified Forensics Analyst (GCFA)” GIAC Web Site - Individual Subject Certifications SANS 12 Jan 2005 < http://www.giac.org/subject_certs.php#gcfa> “Fedora Core 2” Open Source Operating System. Operating System used for the forensics workstation. 12 Jan 05 <http://fedora.redhat.com/> Key fingerprint = AF19

Seen as the desktop background in Item 35 and 45. Published by Defcon.org 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.defcon.org/html/defcon-12/dc-12-art/dc12-art-8.html> “Smoothwall Firewall” The Smoothwall Open Source Project. The Smoothwall Project Team 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.smoothwall.org> “Friendly Net Viewer General Info” Friendly Net Viewer Product Information.

A.Kilevich & Co 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.kilievich.com/fviewer/> (used to make the image) “Free AVG Virus Scanner” The AVG Free Edition. 12 Jan 2005 < http://free.grisoft.com/freeweb.php/doc/2/> “Spyware Doctor” PC Tools Software Web Site <http://www.pctools.com/spyware-doctor> “Technical Details for TROJ_RVP.D” Virus Encyclopaedia. TrendMicro 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/virusencyclo/default5.asp? VName=TROJ_RVP.D>

PC Tools 12 Jan 2005 “Browser Hijacker Description” How to remove Browser Hijackers parasites from computer? 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.2-spyware.com/browser-hijackersremoval>.

Dell Computer Corporation Web Site. Dell Computer Corporation 12 Jan 2005 <http://www1.euro.dell.com/content/products/features .aspx/dimen_2400?c=uk&cs=ukdhs1&l=en&s=dhs> “The Online Sam Spade Tools” Sam Spade Web Site. 12 Jan 2005 <http://www.samspade.org> (tool used to obtain information and pictured)
